---
fip: "0044"
title: Standard Authentication Method for Actors
author: Aayush Rajasekaran (@arajasek), Alex North (@anorth)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/413
status: Draft
type: Technical (Interface)
created: 2022-08-02
replaces: [FIP-0035](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0035.md)
---

## Simple Summary

The Filecoin protocol has entities called "actors" that can be involved in computation on the Filecoin blockchain. 
There are various different kinds of actors; among the most common are accounts and multisigs. 
With [the planned introduction of the Filecoin Virtual Machine](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0030.md), there will be many new kinds of user-defined actors.
Unfortunately, today, the only kind of actors that can "authenticate" a piece of data are account actors -- they do so through a signature validation.
This FIP is the starting point to evolve a convention by which any actor can verify such authenticity. It simply proposes adding a special "authenticate" message that actors can choose to implement. 
If they do implement such a method, it can be used by other actors to authenticate pieces of data.

## Abstract

There is a need for arbitrary actors to be able to verify (to other actors) that they have approved of a piece of data. This need will become more pressing with the Filecoin Virtual Machine.
This FIP proposes adding an `Authenticate` method that any actor can choose to implement. 
This method can be called by any other actor to verify the authenticity of a piece of data. This is a small change to the existing actors, and allows for user-defined actors to flexibly implement this method according to their needs.
Concretely, we add this method to the built-in `Account` actor, and have the `Storage Market` actor invoke this method,
in lieu of validating signatures directly.

## Change Motivation

We want any actors, including user-defined actors, to be able to authenticate arbitrary data.
If we don't have this ability, we will need to engineer around it in painful ways. 

The proposed [FIP-0035](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0035.md)
is a concrete example. It seeks to allow user-defined actors to serve as storage clients in the built-in `Storage Market` actor.
In order to enable this, it proposes adding several new methods and data types in order to work around the 
inability of user-defined actors to authenticate data.

It will be infeasible to modify the builtin-actors themselves every time we want to be able to authenticate some new kind of information, and doing so will require more total messages 
to be landing on the Filecoin blockchain. Instead, a flexible, universal approach for actors to authenicate data would be preferred.

## Specification

We propose adding the following method to the built-in `Account` Actor. 
This method can then be the blueprint for other builtin actors (eg. the multisig actor), 
as well as a template for user-defined actors.

```
    /// Authenticates whether the provided input is valid for the provided message.
    /// Errors with USR_ILLEGAL_ARGUMENT if the authentication is invalid.
    pub fn authenticate_message(params: AuthenticateMessageParams) -> Result<(), ActorError>
```

The params to this method is a wrapper over the message and signature to validate:

```
pub struct AuthenticateMessageParams {
    pub authorization: Vec<u8>,
    pub message: Vec<u8>,
}
```

Further, we propose modifying the StorageMarketActor to call this method when validating `ClientDealProposal`s instead of validating signatures directly.

## Design Rationale

The idea is to create a flexible, lightweight endpoint that actors can expose to callers that might want to
validate its authorization. Some actors will have very obvious implementations: the account actor simply 
performs a signature validation, while an `m/n` multisig need only perform `m` signature validations.
Other actors might opt for creative implementations of such authorization based on their needs. Yet 
others can choose not to support this endpoint at all -- the Filecoin protocol's singleton builtin-actors
such as the Storage Power Actor, the System Actor, the Cron Actor, etc. will likely choose to omit this method.

In order for this method to function as a standard for future actors, it needs a standardized invocation pattern. 
In the current dispatch model based on method numbers, that would be a standardized method number for `authenticate_message` methods. This FIP does not propose adopting a standard method number, preferring to rely on a new standardized calling convention, such as [FRC-0042](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FRCs/frc-0042.md) instead.

## Backwards Compatibility

Introducing new methods to the builtin-actors needs a network upgrade, but otherwise breaks no backwards compatibility.

## Test Cases

Proposed test cases include:

- that the `authenticate_message` method on account actors can be called and succeeds with valid input
- that the `authenticate_message` method on account actors can be called, but fails with invalid input
- that storage deals can be made with the changes to the `StorageMarketActor`

## Security Considerations

We need to be careful with the security of the `authenticate_message` implementations of the
builtin-actors. User-defined contracts are free to implement these methods as they see fit.

This FIP only proposes adding the `authenticate_message` method to the account actor, which 
simply invokes the signature validation syscall.

## Incentive Considerations

This proposal is generally well-aligned with the incentives of the network. It can be considered
as a simpler replacement for FIP-0035, with the only drawback being that this proposal as currently written does not allow for the existing built-in multisig actor to be a storage client. 

## Product Considerations

This proposal is the first step towards enabling non-account actors to function as clients for
storage deals, which is a major product improvement. Furthermore, it enables future innovation 
that relies on the ability of non-account actors to authenticate data as approved.

## Implementation

Partial implementation [here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/builtin-actors/pull/502)

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
