---
fip: "0050"
title: API between user-programmed actors and built-in actors
author: Alex North (@anorth), Aayush Rajasekaran <@arajasek>
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/401
status: Last Call
type: <Technical (Core)>
category (*only required for Standard Track): <Core>
created: <2022-12-05>
---

<!--You can leave these HTML comments in your merged FIP and delete the visible duplicate text guides, they will not appear and may be helpful to refer to if you edit it again. This is the suggested template for new FIPs. Note that a FIP number will be assigned by an editor. When opening a pull request to submit your FIP, please use an abbreviated title in the filename, `fip-draft_title_abbrev.md`. The title should be 44 characters or less.-->


## Simple Summary
<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the FIP.-->

Restrict invocation of all existing built-in actors methods to built-in actors. Re-export a stable subset of those methods, along with some new methods, for invocation by user actors.

## Abstract
<!--A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.-->

Built-in actors, the set of "protocol actors", have existed since the inception of the network.
As the Filecoin protocol has been improved, they have repeatedly been changed,
including having old functionality removed, and having interfaces modified.

User-programmed actors, or so-called "smart contracts", will start being deployed with
the launch of the FEVM. These actors cannot easily (or ever) be upgraded, and will want to rely
on the interfaces of the built-in actors for information about the Filecoin blockchain.
This leads to a conflict of interests -- aspects of the built-in actors must continue to be
updated (in order to improve the protocol), but none of the interfaces exposed to
user-programmed actors can ever change (because that would "break" user-programmed actors
relying on those interfaces). 

This FIP proposes a way to balance these conflicting interests
by only allowing a stable subset of the built-in actors interfaces to be exposed to
user-programmed actors. The restriction is implemented based on method numbers derived from the calling convention in 
[FRC-0042](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FRCs/frc-0042.md). 
All existing methods are restricted by default, with some explicitly re-exported for invocation by user actors.

## Change Motivation

User-programmed actors on the FVM will want to interact with the built-in actors, especially those related to storage. The built-in actors were not designed with calls from user actors in mind, so do not present a good interface to them.

In the past, we have been able to alter the APIs presented by the built-in actors because callers were either other built in actors (which we could atomically upgrade) or off-chain parties (who can change their code). User-programmed actors will be a new class of caller which will generally be unable or unwilling to upgrade to new APIs. This means that if we ever change a built-in actor method that a user actor depends on, we would break that actor. Network stakeholders will likely be extremely reluctant to break existing actors, with the implication that built-in actor methods reachable by user-programmed actors are effectively permanent.

Indefinite compatibility requirements on a legacy or poorly-conceived interface could present a very significant restriction on future improvements to Filecoin’s protocol and capabilities.

## Specification
<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Filecoin implementations. -->

There are two chief aspects to the proposed changes:

- Restricting all existing methods to being "internal" to other built-in actors
- Exporting a new list of new methods in a "public" API that can be called by user actors

In order to implement these changes, we continue the use of the calling convention developed in [FRC-0042](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FRCs/frc-0042.md). 
This FRC provides a convention for converting method names to method numbers. The convention never produces a method number lower than 2^24, which provides us a range for the internal method numbers.

### Restricted internal API

The currently implemented API of all built-in actors is restricted to reject calls from any caller that isn't a built-in actor.
We perform this check by looking up the code ID of the calling actor, and only proceeding if the caller is a non-EVM built-in actor.
  These interfaces can then be relatively easily changed in the future as needed. The restriction is uniformly applied to all existing actors today. When a method is invoked, we check whether the method number is:

- Greater than or equal to 2^24: If so, the method is presumed "exported", and are callable, regardless of the type of caller
- Less than 2^24: If so, we lookup the code CID of the caller, which is exposed through the runtime. If the caller has one of the CIDs of the built-in actors, the invocation continues; if not, the call is rejected.

### New public API

We add a series of methods to the suite of built-in actors. These methods are exported using [FRC-0042](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FRCs/frc-0042.md), 
and can be called by any type of caller. Some of these methods are explicitly exported duplicates of existing methods, while others are newly added. The full listed of exported methods, broken down by actor is:

#### Account Actor

- AuthenticateMessage
- UniversalReceiverHook (already exported)

#### Cron Actor

No methods are exported for the Cron actor.

#### Datacap Actor

- Name
- Symbol
- TotalSupply
- Balance (renamed from BalanceOf to be inline with [FRC-0046](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FRCs/frc-0046.md))
- Transfer
- TransferFrom
- IncreaseAllowance
- DecreaseAllowance
- RevokeAllowance
- Burn
- BurnFrom
- Allowance
- Granularity (New): Returns the granularity of the Datacap Token

#### Init Actor

- Exec

#### Storage Market Actor

- AddBalance
- WithdrawBalance
- PublishStorageDeals
- GetBalance (New): Returns the escrow balance and locked amount for an address.
- GetDealDataCommitment (New): Returns the data commitment and size of a deal proposal.
- GetDealClient (New): Returns the client of a deal proposal.
- GetDealProvider (New): Returns the provider of a deal proposal.
- GetDealLabel (New): Returns the label of a deal proposal.
- GetDealTerm (New): Returns the start epoch and duration (in epochs) of a deal proposal.
- GetDealTotalPrice (New): Returns the total price that will be paid from the client to the provider for this deal.
- GetDealClientCollateral (New): Returns the client collateral requirement for a deal proposal.
- GetDealProviderCollateral (New): Returns the provider collateral requirement for a deal proposal.
- GetDealVerified (New): Returns the verified flag for a deal proposal.
- GetDealActivation (New): Fetches activation state for a deal.

#### Miner Actor

- ChangeWorkerAddress
- ChangePeerID
- WithdrawBalance
- ChangeMultiaddrs
- ConfirmChangeWorkerAddress
- RepayDebt
- ChangeOwnerAddress
- ChangeBeneficiary
- GetBeneficiary
- GetOwner (New): Returns the owner address.
- IsControllingAddress (New): Returns whether the provided address is the Owner, the Worker, or any of the Control Addresses.
- GetSectorSize (New): Returns the miner's sector size.
- GetAvailableBalance (New): Returns the available balance of this miner.
- GetVestingFunds (New): Returns the funds vesting in this miner as a list of (vesting_epoch, vesting_amount) tuples.
- GetPeerID (New): Returns the Peer ID for this miner.
- GetMultiaddrs (New): Returns the multiaddresses set for this miner.

#### Multisig Actor

No methods are exported for the Multisig actor, besides the UniversalReceiverHook (which was already exported).

#### Payment Channel Actor

No methods are exported for the Payment Channel actor.

#### Storage Power Actor

- CreateMiner
- NetworkRawPower (New): Returns the total raw power of the network.
- MinerRawPower (New): Returns the raw power claimed by the specified miner, and whether the miner has more than the consensus minimum amount of storage active.
- MinerCount (New): Returns the total number of miners created, regardless of whether or not they have any pledged storage.
- MinerConsensusCount (New): Returns the total number of miners that have more than the consensus minimum amount of storage active.

#### Reward Actor

No methods are exported for the Reward actor.

#### System Actor

No methods are exported for the System actor.

#### Verified Registry Actor

- AddVerifiedClient
- RemoveExpiredAllocations
- GetClaims
- ExtendClaimTerms
- RemoveExpiredClaims
- Receive

### Other Changes

We propose making some minor changes to built-in actor functionality that align with the principles of this FIP:

- Where methods have been duplicated, built-in actors start calling the exported methods where possible. The affected methods are:
  - AccountActor::AuthenticateMessage 
  - DatacapActor::Mint
  - DatacapActor::Destroy
  - DatacapActor::BalanceOf (renamed to DatacapActor::Balance, to be in line with [FRC-0046](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FRCs/frc-0046.md))
  - MarketActor::PublishStorageDeals
- Where methods have been duplicated and have no real-world callers today, we deprecate the old method. The deprecated methods are:
  - AccountActor::AuthenticateMessage
  - DatacapActor::Mint
  - DatacapActor::Destroy
  - DatacapActor::Name
  - DatacapActor::Symbol
  - DatacapActor::TotalSupply
  - DatacapActor::BalanceOf
  - DatacapActor::Transfer
  - DatacapActor::TransferFrom
  - DatacapActor::IncreaseAllowance
  - DatacapActor::DecreaseAllowance
  - DatacapActor::Burn
  - DatacapActor::BurnFrom
  - DatacapActor::Allowance
- Drop checks that the following entities are "signable" (currently defined as either an Account or a Multisig):
  - Callers of Market::AddBalance and Market::PublishStorageDeals
  - Owner addresses and Control addresses of Storage Miners
  - Callers of Miner::DisputeWindowedPost and Miner::ReportConsensusFault
  - Callers of Multisig::Propose, Multisig::Approve, and Multisig::Cancel
  - Callers of Power::CreateMiner
- Modify `MarketActor::PublishStorageDeals` to call out to exported method `MarketNotifyDeal` for all deal clients
  - Parameters are deal ID and serialized proposal
  - Errors are unchecked so client actor need not implement `MarketNotifyDeal`

## Design Rationale
<!--The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.-->

The chief principle behind the design is to thoughtfully create a public API that exposes useful information & functionality to user actors, without locking in any interfaces that we consider unstable. Restricting the entirety of the existing suite of methods ensures we aren't exporting any methods without conscious thought. 

Where possible, interfaces are described in terms of concepts instead of concrete details (eg. `IsControllingAddress` instead of `GetControlAddresses`). Some functionality that was previously callable by accounts & multisigs is extended to user actors, but much of this functionality is still restricted. As an example, none of the Miner Actor's interfaces that involve the current sector addressing scheme are exposed. We may re-evaluate this decision in the face of pressing user needs, but for now we are choosing not to allow (for example) a user actor to `ProveCommit` a sector.

The current listed of exported methods is intended to be a starting point, and is not "complete" in any sense. We will likely have similar FIPs in the future that export new pieces of information and functionality to user actors.


## Backwards Compatibility
<!--All FIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The FIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. FIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.-->

This FIP introduces several actors changes, and therefore needs a new actors version shipped in a network upgrade. No existing functionality is broken, however.

## Test Cases
<!--Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for FIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other FIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.-->

- All existing methods are correctly restricted
- User actors can call all exported methods
- Newly introduced methods are correct

## Security Considerations
<!--All FIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. FIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. A FIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.-->

This is not a particularly security-sensitive FIP. No new functionality is being introduced that can be used to attack the network, and bugs in the implementation will only lead to incorrect behaviour being observed by user actors.

## Incentive Considerations
<!--All FIPs must contain a section that discusses the incentive implications/considerations relative to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for incentive discussion. A discussion on how the proposed change will incentivize reliable and useful storage is required. FIP submissions missing the "Incentive Considerations" section will be rejected. An FIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Incentive Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.-->

None.

## Product Considerations
<!--All FIPs must contain a section that discusses the product implications/considerations relative to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for product discussion. A discussion on how the proposed change will enable better storage-related goods and services to be developed on Filecoin. FIP submissions missing the "Product Considerations" section will be rejected. An FIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Product Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.-->

This FIP is intended to expose core information and functionality to user-defined actors. In doing so, it is hoped that this FIP will support the development of novel actors that interact with Filecoin's storage mechanics and unlock new use cases.

## Implementation
<!--The implementations must be completed before any core FIP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the FIP is accepted. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.-->

The implementation may be found in the [integration/builtin-api](https://github.com/filecoin-project/builtin-actors/commits/integration/builtin-api)
branch of the built-in actors repository. 

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
