---
fip: "0101" 
title: Removal of the ProveCommitAggregate method from the miner actor
author: "Rod Vagg (@rvagg)"
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1116
status: Final
type: Technical (Core)
category: Core
created: 2025-02-05
spec-sections: 
  - 2.9.25.63 Storage Power Actor
  - 2.11.30 Sector
  - 2.11.31 Storage Miner
  - 2.12.35 Markets
  - 4.19.59 Proof-of-Spacetime (PoSt)
requires: N/A
replaces: N/A
---

# FIP-0101: Removal of the ProveCommitAggregate method from the miner actor

## Simple Summary
This FIP proposes the removal of the `ProveCommitAggregate` method (Method 26) from the miner actor as it is no longer actively used due to the introduction of `ProveCommitSectors3`, which offers the same functionality in a more flexible manner.

## Abstract
The `ProveCommitAggregate` method was implemented for batch processing of pre-committed sectors using aggregate proofs. However, the subsequent introduction of `ProveCommitSectors3` allows greater flexibility and efficiency in handling this task. Given that `ProveCommitAggregate` has been deprecated in practical use, it adds unnecessary complexity to the system and generates technical debt. This FIP proposes to remove this method from the miner actor to simplify the protocol.

## Change Motivation
The main motivation behind this change is builtin actor cleanup and reduction of technical debt. It is always beneficial to remove unused parts of the system as it leads to simpler, more maintainable, and less error-prone code. The `ProveCommitAggregate` method is no longer necessary since `ProveCommitSectors3` serves the same purpose more efficiently.

## Specification
Implementation-wise, this change involves removing Method 26 (`ProveCommitAggregate`) from the miner actor, all associated helper methods that are not used by other methods and all tests that uniquely test its functionality.

## Design Rationale
The decision to propose this change was made primarily because of the redundancy created by `ProveCommitSectors3`. Efficient and clean code being prioritised where possible over an ever-increase in complexity and potential for bugs.

## Backwards Compatibility
This change will not introduce any backward incompatibilities, as the `ProveCommitAggregate` method is not actively used and its functionality is covered by `ProveCommitSectors3`. The author is unaware of any implementations that rely on `ProveCommitAggregate` and on-chain usage suggests there are none.

## Test Cases
Test cases will need to ensure that `ProveCommitSectors3` method is able to cover all the functionality previously offered by `ProveCommitAggregate` and that the system behaves normally following the removal of Method 26.

Care should be taken with the removal of `ProveCommitAggregate` tests to avoid removal of tests of other parts of the system that are not covered by other test cases. In this situation, tests should be reworked to use `ProveCommitSectors3` to test the same functionality.

## Security Considerations
This FIP doesn't alter any security features of Filecoin protocol, as it only involves the removal of a deprecated method. It does, however, reduce the attack surface area where there may exist previously unknown security bugs.

## Incentive Considerations
Removing the `ProveCommitAggregate` method from the miner actor does not have any direct impact on the incentive mechanisms in the Filecoin protocol.

## Product Considerations
Once the deprecated `ProveCommitAggregate` method is removed, users and developers will experience a cleaner and slightly less confusing system.

## Implementation
As the implementation involves removal of a method from the current codebase, it is expected to be relatively straightforward and low-risk.

No migration is necessary.

### Removal tasks
- Remove `ProveCommitAggregate` method from the miner actor.
- Ensure that tests for `ProveCommitSectors3` effectively cover the same functionality.
- Ensure that removal of tests previously covering `ProveCommitAggregate` doesn't result in an overall reduction in test coverage.
- Ensure all systems behave normally with the removal of `ProveCommitAggregate`.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
