---
fip: "0112"
title: Export Sector Status to FEVM 
author: "@Kubuxu @lordshashank @ZenGround0"
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1108
status: Draft
type: Technical (Core)
category: Core
created: 2025-11-26
spec-sections: 
  - System Actors (miner actor) 
---

<!--You can leave these HTML comments in your merged FIP and delete the visible duplicate text guides, they will not appear and may be helpful to refer to if you edit it again. This is the suggested template for new FIPs. Note that a FIP number will be assigned by an editor. When opening a pull request to submit your FIP, please use an abbreviated title in the filename, `fip-draft_title_abbrev.md`. The title should be 44 characters or less.-->

# FIP-0112: Export Sector Status to FEVM

## Simple Summary
<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the FIP.-->

We propose exporting new methods `ValidateSectorStatus` `GenerateSectorLocation` a `ValidateSectorStatus` to allow smart contracts to read the status of filecoin sectors.

## Abstract
<!--A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.-->
We propose exporting a new method `ValidateSectorStatus`(3092458564) from the builtin miner actor for creating user space FEVM smart contracts that can check the status of filecoin sectors, either active, faulty or dead, on chain.  An additional exported method `GenerateSectorLocation`(1321604665) can be used in an offchain call to generate inputs to `ValidateSectorStatus`.

Combined with the recent changes to ProveCommitSectors3 in FIP-0109 allowing smart contract notifications upon sector commitment, this FIP establishes a minimally useful interface for a rich set of programmable storage applications.

Additionally this FIP proposes exposing a helper method `GetNominalSectorExpiration`(3010055991) which takes as input a `SectorNumber` and returns the expiration epoch forboth live sectors and dead sectors that have not yet been cleaned up from the sectors AMT


## Change Motivation
<!--The motivation is critical for FIPs that want to change the Filecoin protocol. It should clearly explain why the existing protocol specification is inadequate to address the problem that the FIP solves. FIP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected outright.-->

This FIP is motivated by efforts to experiment with programmable storage systems built with smart contracts.  It is essential to have the basic information of sector liveness to do anything interesting with sector storage.  Examples include custom storage payments, badbit insurance systems and markets for sector repair.

Sector expiration epoch information has also been identified by previous attempts to build smart contract secured storage systems.

In particular this is concretely motivated by recent efforts to create the "filecoin onchain cloud" system which aims to integrate both PDP and PoRep proving schemes in pursuit of a unique storage product.

To outline the design context in a bit more detail: The "Direct Data Onboarding" FIPs have created push style notifications from the sector system to user programmable smart contracts.  There are reasons why push notifications are superior to the more standard blockchain pull notification design.  Essentially as an application developer it is nice to have a network operator party do notification work for you rather than building and running a monitoring and notification system.  Unfortunately getting push style notifications for sector expiration and termination interacts with the cron subsystem of builtin actors in an unsafe way.  Having pull notifications for the full information on sector lifecycle is our only path forward barring a large and uncertain system redesign.  Please have a look at [this discussion](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/493) if that sounds interesting to you.

## Specification
<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Filecoin implementations. -->

Three methods will be added to the builtin miner actor.

### GenerateSectorLocation

This method is designed to be called offline.  It takes as input a sector number.  It performs an expensive linear search through deadline state of the miner actor to return the deadline index and partition index termed the `SectorLocation`.  If no deadline or partition of this sector records any information about this sector number then this method returns the special values NO_DEADLINE, NO_PARTITION which are defined to be -1. In order to smoothly provide an input for the future proofed aux_data representation of `SectorLocation` that `ValidateSectorStatus` requires, the actual returned value is a struct wrapping this serialized value.  Additionally this method returns the measured sector status in the return field.

This method should be implemented using the existing miner actor state method `find_sector` which performs the linear search.

To preempt the expensive sector search when the sector is completely removed from state or does not exist the implementation should first check the sectors AMT for the sector number.  It is an invariant that all sectors tracked in a partition must be present in the sectors AMT.

Note that offline indexes of miner state mapping from sector number to location indexes can be queried to replace calls to this method if greater efficiency is required.

Input type: 
```rust
pub struct GenerateSectorLocationParams {
    pub sector_number: SectorNumber,
}
```

Return type: 

```rust
pub struct GenerateSectorLocationReturn {                                                                                                                                  
	pub status: SectorStatusCode,
	pub aux_data: Vec<u8>, // CBOR-encoded (deadline, partition)                                                                                                           
}
```

### ValidateSectorStatus

This method takes in a sector number, generic serialized bytes encoding a sector location and the status of the sector, either `Active`, `Dead`, or `Faulty`.  It returns true if the correct sector status is passed.  Note that the sector location input paramter is specified to be a generic upgradeable byte slice format. The first implementation should use the standard tuple based cbor encoding of the `SectorLocation` type, i.e. `[i64, i64]`.  Note that the three possible statuses form a partition over all sectors, i.e. for each sector there is one and only one valid status.  Further note some relevant terminology from builtin-actors: `live` sectors are those that have not been terminated, including `faulty` sectors and `active` sectors which are not faulty.  `dead` sectors are either terminated or never activated and are therefore never `faulty`.

This method uses the sector location to look up the sector's partition and determine if the `sectors` bitfield includes the specified sector number.  If it is validating a declared `Active` sector it checks that the `terminated` bitfield does not include the sector number.

When validating a `Dead` sector with a partition and deadline index >= 0 this method performs the same lookup and verifies that the sector number is present in the `Terminated` bitfield.  If the sector is not found at the provided index the method errors.  If the the partition and deadline index are NO_PARTITION and NO_DEADLINE then the method verifies that the sector number is not assigned to any member of the miner actor's sectors AMT.

To validate a `Faulty` sector the method loads the partition state at the input sector location. It returns true if and only if the sector number is set in the partition's `faults` bitfield.  This will not be the case if the sector is 1) active (i.e. live and unfaulted) or 2) terminated.

There are edge cases around NO_PARTITION, NO_DEADLINE.  If only one of these is provided this is an invalid sector location error.  When sector numbers are not found matching a sector location this is a not found error.  If `(NO_PARTITION, NO_DEADLINE)` is provided as a location this location is always "found".  If it is passed as a location to validate `Active` or `Faulty` statuses these are trivially never found in this location and the validation method returns false.

Input type:
```rust
pub struct ValidateSectorStatusParams {
    pub sector_number: SectorNumber,
    pub status: SectorStatusCode,
    pub aux_data: Vec<u8>,
}
```

```rust 
pub enum SectorStatusCode {
    /// Sector is active (not terminated, not faulty)
    Active,
    /// Sector is not live (terminated or never committed)
    Dead,
	/// Sector is currently faulty (live but not active) 
	Faulty,
}
```

Return type: `bool`


### GetNominalSectorExpiration

This method takes a sector number and returns the stable expiration time for this sector.  It looks up the stable expiration time from the `SectorOnChainInfo` in the sectors AMT.


Input type:
```rust
SectorNumber
```

Return type:
```rust
ChainEpoch
```

## Design Rationale
<!--The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.-->

We explicitly have chosen to make the main status interface a validating interface versus a data retrieval interface.  This design puts the burden of index search/storage and making data available on off chain callers since the caller to the validate method must already have looked up the answer to the query they are validating.  This forces designs which are ignorant of miner actor bookkeeping decisions allowing freedom to evolve miner actor design without breaking external interfaces.  Today there are calls, notably `compact_partitions`, which can change a sector's partition index.  So this design helpfully steers smart contract developers away from relying on unstable system internals.

The `aux_data` field in the input to `ValidateSectorStatusInfoParams` further allows us to evolve the method with changes to the builtin miner actor.  For the first implementation, the `ValidateSectorStatus` should expect a CBOR tuple serialization of `SectorLocation`.

We've included the convenient `GenerateSectorLocation` method to provide an easy canonical way to generate sector location indexes, though we expect pre-existing offchain indexes to be considered as alternative sources of sector location when adding support for this change into fullnodes.

We forwent a similar validating interface pattern with `GetNominalSectorExpiration`.  This would look like a method that takes in the correct expiration and returns True or False depending on whether the input expiration is correct.  This is done for expediency and convenience.  The thinking is that this method only ever provides a useful hint anyway as it cannot provide any useful information when handling early terminations.


## Backwards Compatibility
<!--All FIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The FIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. FIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.-->
This FIP only adds methods to the builtin miner actor.  No backwards compatibility concerns need to be considered.

## Test Cases
<!--Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for FIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other FIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.-->

* When `generate_sector_location` is input sector number of a terminated sector that has been compacted via `compact_partitions` it returns (NO_DEADLINE, NO_PARTITION) without error
* `generate_sector_location` correctly finds an existing active sector
* `generate_sector_location` correctly finds an existing terminated but not compacted sector
* `generate_sector_location` returns (NO_DEADLINE, NO_PARTITION) on a sector number that has not yet been prove committed
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns true when declaring a Dead sector with (NO_DEADLINE, NO_PARTITION) location as Dead 
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns true when declaring a Dead sector with a location as true
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns true when declaring an Active sector as Active
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns true when declaring a Faulty sector Faulty
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns false when declaring an Active sector Dead
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns false when declaring a Dead sector Active
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns false when declaring a Faulty sector Active
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns false when declaring a Faulty sector Dead
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns false when declaring a Dead sector Faulty
* `ValidateSectorStatus` returns false when declaring an Active sector Faulty
* `ValidateSectorStatus` fails with bad location
* `GetNominalSectorExpiration` returns the correct sector expiration
* `GetNominalSectorExpiration` fails when sector is not present in sectors AMT
* `GetNominalSectorExpiration` returns the nominal value after the sector has expired
* `GetNominalSectorExpiration` returns the nominal (incorrect) value after the sector has been early terminated

## Security Considerations
<!--All FIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. FIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. A FIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.-->
Adding view methods to the builtin miner actor does not have any implications for filecoin's L1 security model.

This FIP is ensuring a security model for FEVM user contracts.  It must be the case that 
1) all active sectors can be validated as active
2) no sectors that are not active can be validated as active

These conditions are satisfied by the invariants governing the `sectors`, `faulty` and `terminated` bitfields in the miner actors `Partition` state object.  All active sectors satisfy:
a) sector number recorded in the `sectors` bitfield of some `Partition`
b) sector number NOT recorded in the `terminated` bitfield of the same `Partition`
c) sector number NOT recorded in the `faulty` bitfield of the same `Partition`

Furthermore the separation of the search for the partition and deadline index into the offchain call `GenerateSectorLocation` ensures that gas costs and miner state size have no impact on a user's ability to make the call checking sector status.  Hence there is no practical denial of service to make the sector status call and condition (1) is satisfied both in principle and in practice.


## Incentive Considerations
<!--All FIPs must contain a section that discusses the incentive implications/considerations relative to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for incentive discussion. A discussion on how the proposed change will incentivize reliable and useful storage is required. FIP submissions missing the "Incentive Considerations" section will be rejected. An FIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Incentive Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.-->
This FIP is not concerned with existing incentives.  This work can be used to create a foundation for new applications that rely on its security model to spend incentives productively.

## Product Considerations
<!--All FIPs must contain a section that discusses the product implications/considerations relative to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for product discussion. A discussion on how the proposed change will enable better storage-related goods and services to be developed on Filecoin. FIP submissions missing the "Product Considerations" section will be rejected. An FIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Product Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.-->
The interface with the filecoin sector storage system was chosen to support the authors' concept of a minimally viable FEVM sector storage service.  Periodically checking liveness of a sector onchain is a simple way to create a storage system verified in user space.  And it is not too onerous on participating storage providers.

Including the `Faulty` status has been a matter of debate.  We are including it to match the PDP service's precedent payment model that periods of missed proofs should not incur any user payment.  It is also motivated by the goal to reduce the worst case latency between data becoming irrecoverability faulty and consuming contracts getting a signal of this.

The counterargument is that rational storage providers will terminate unrecoverable data immediately to avoid extra fault fees limiting this latency in practice.  And storage providers could readily be required to provide collateral to refund (greater than or equal to) the expected fault duration period upon termination to provide good guarantees that payment is not netted for irrecoverable faults.  Additionally there is limited utility to check faultiness in real time without an additional system dedicated to monitoring and pushing signals of faults to consumer contracts.

There has also been discussion on not including sector expiration information.  Expiration information has limitations in usefulness given that early termination can happen at any time and invalidate expiration.  However the cost is low and the interface is simple especially with a decoupled method specifically for retrieving expirations.

## Implementation
<!--The implementations must be completed before any core FIP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the FIP is accepted. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.-->
WIP builtin actors PR here: https://github.com/filecoin-project/builtin-actors/pull/1707

## TODO
<!--A section that lists any unresolved issues or tasks that are part of the FIP proposal. Examples of these include performing benchmarking to know gas fees, validate claims made in the FIP once the final implementation is ready, etc. A FIP can only move to a “Last Call” status once all these items have been resolved.-->

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
