---
fip: "0092"
title: Non-Interactive PoRep
author: luca (@lucaniz), kuba (@Kubuxu), nicola (@nicola), nemo (@cryptonemo), volker (@vmx), irene (@irenegia), Alex North (@anorth), orjan (@Phi-rjan)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854 and https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1007
status: Final
replaces: FIP-0090
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2024-06-04
---
# FIP-0092: Non-Interactive PoRep

## Simple Summary

This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors. This proposal builds on and supersedes  [FIP-0090: Non-Interactive PoRep](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md).

As a result, we have

- Simplified storage onboarding pipeline;
- Trustless separation between storage and computing: the proving tasks associated with sector onboarding can be outsourced;
- Unblocking [SupraSeal](https://github.com/supranational/supra_seal)'s full potential.

## Abstract

Non-Interactive PoRep (NI-PoRep) allows the removal of on-chain interaction when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors by changing the way PoRep challenges are generated.

The protocol allows Storage Providers (SPs) to locally generate PoRep challenges instead of using on-chain randomness.

On the one hand, this feature of the protocol allows for a drastically simpler onboarding pipeline. On the other hand, it requires a higher number of PoRep challenges (2268 per SDR layer instead of the current 180 per SDR layer) in order to preserve network security.

NI-PoRep is proposed as an *optional* feature; the previously available proof types will still be supported. NI-PoRep is restricted to CC sectors (i.e., sectors with no data).

## Motivation

NI-PoRep will be beneficial for Filecoin in multiple ways, outlined below.

### Cost reduction thanks to a simplified onboarding pipeline

PoRep is currently interactive (in order to complete sealing, an SP has to wait to receive a challenge seed from the chain) and requires ad-hoc collateral. These features represent a limitation when considering optimisation for the onboarding pipeline, such as Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) and the new SupraSeal sealing code. With NI-PoRep, no interaction is needed and this yields:

- [Gas cost reduction] The current PoRep is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. With NI-PoRep there is no more `PreCommit` method and message, and only `ProveCommit` remains, i.e. only one step with one chain message is needed to onboard sectors to the network.  This translates into a possible gas cost reduction when considering aggregated sectors; according to [our estimation](../resources/fip-0090/PoRep_GasComparison.pdf), current PoRep is 2.1x more expensive than NI-PoRep when aggregating 6 sectors.
- [Lower hardware requirements] With NI-PoRep, there is no more waiting time between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`. This helps when using sealing software (like SupraSeal) that seals more sectors at the same time. Currently, memory requirements are increased by the fact that some data need to be stored during the waiting time. Having no waiting time implies lower memory requirements. 

### Trustless Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) becomes possible

NI-PoRep enables the full separation between computation and storage tasks. In particular, no `PCD` ([PreCommit Deposit](https://spec.filecoin.io/#section-systems.filecoin_mining.storage_mining.balance-requirements)) is needed, which brings the following benefits:
- Currently a SaaS Provider (the entity running the PoRep steps) needs to put down the PCD for the sector, along with the PreCommit message. The PCD will be re-paid or prepaid by the SP sending the final SNARK proof on the chain (i.e., the SP that will store the sector for the following PoST). With NI-PoRep, this level of payment interaction is not needed. In particular, this kind of simplification helps SPs and SaaS providers to delegate computation tasks (ie, PoRep can be split into specialized subtasks that get outsourced to specialized entities).
- Enabling HDD wholesale: it would be possible for an SP to receive brand new drives with `sectorKeys ` pre-generated using its `miner_id`.

### Allow Storage Providers to specify proving deadline

Storage providers can specify the proving deadline they want their NI-PoRep sectors to be allocated to upon onboarding. This provides storage providers with greater operational flexibility compared to having the WindowPoST workload spread over 24 hours.

### PoRep secured cryptographically and not rationally

The cryptographic security of sectors proven with NI-PoRep is increased: NI-PoRep makes misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.

### PoRep security now independent from consensus

The current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, a 150-epochs-wait is needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`([WaitSeed](https://lotus.filecoin.io/storage-providers/get-started/tasks/#waitseed)). This is due to the fact that some consensus attacks need to be made infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).
In NI-PoRep, since randomness is derived locally, there is no link anymore between PoRep and consensus attacks. This means that

- Consensus attacks are not a concern anymore for NI-PoRep security;
- PoRep can now work “agnostically” with any consensus protocol.

## Backward Compatibility

- NI-PoRep would be a separate proof type with a different on-chain flow as the current PoRep. Anyone can decide whether to use NI-PoRep or not.
- No need for a new trusted setup.

## Specification

The NI-PoRep protocol can be summarized as follows (see [here](https://spec.filecoin.io/algorithms/sdr/notation/) for notation and [here](https://spec.filecoin.io/algorithms/sdr/) for basic algorithms):

**Graph labelling and commitments** (similar to the current PC1 and PC2 computation)

1. Using `ReplicaID`, SP computes the labels for all layers and the replica R;
2. SP computes the column commitments `CommC` , `CommRLast` and finally computes `CommR = Poseidon_2(CommC, CommRLast)`;

**SP locally generates `NIChallengesNumber` challenges and vanilla proofs;**

1. Each challenge is of the form `NIChallenge_i = H(ReplicaID, CommR, i)`;
2. SP computes responses for all the `NIChallengesNumber` challenges, which result in `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs;

**SP publishes the new `NIProveCommitSector` proof**

1. SP takes the `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges and aggregates them into a single proof.
2. SP publishes the aggregated SNARK proof and commitment `CommR`.

**Chain verifies proof**

1. Using `CommR` as a seed, the chain generates `NIChallengesNumber` challenges and these are fed into proof verification.

Note that, same as with interactive PoRep, each sector has a `SealRandEpoch` that identifies the sealing epoch; chain verification needs to happen within a fixed number of epochs to be valid. For NI-PoRep we call this parameter `sealChallengeEarliest`and set it to be equal to the number of epochs in 180 days (more details in the [Security Considerations section](#security-considerations)).

### Actor changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when submitting a new sector
    - `StackedDrg32GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep`
    - `StackedDrg64GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep`
- Introduce a new method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` (method 36), which performs a non-interactive proof for CC sectors, without a preceding PreCommitSector message (ie, this method rejects sectors that were already pre-committed. Such sectors must be activated with one of the existing ProveCommit methods). The method can be used with aggregate proofs, even if there is only a single sector to prove. Individual or batched seal proofs are not supported. The return type includes a bitfield indicating the success of activating each referenced sector.
  
  ```go
  // Note no UnsealedCID because it must be "zero" data.
  struct SectorNIActivationInfo {
      SealingNumber: SectorNumber, // Sector number used to generate replica id
      SealerID: ActorID, // Must be set to ID of receiving actor for now
      SealedCID: Cid, // CommR
      SectorNumber: SectorNumber, // unique id of sector for the receiving actor
      SealRandEpoch: ChainEpoch,
      Expiration: ChainEpoch,
  }

  struct ProveCommitSectorsNIParams {
     // Information about sealing of each sector.
     Sectors: []SectorNIActivationInfo
     // Aggregate proof for all sectors.
     AggregateProof: []byte,
     // Proof type for each seal (must be an NI-PoRep variant)
     SealProofType: RegisteredSealProof,
     // Proof type for aggregation
     AggregateProofType: RegisteredAggregateProof
     // The Window PoST deadline index at which to schedule the new sectors.
     ProvingDeadline uint64
     // Whether to abort if any sector activation fails.
     RequireActivationSuccess: bool,
   }

   struct ProveCommitSectorsNIReturn {
    pub activation_results: BatchReturn,
   }
  ```
  
- Constraints:
  - The `ProvingDeadline` must be between 0 and 47, inclusive. It corresponds to the Window PoST deadline index at which all the new sectors must be regularly proven. The `ProvingDeadline` must not be the current or next deadline to be proven by the receiving actor. If an illegal deadline is submitted, the message will fail with an error code `ErrIllegalArgument`.
  
- Related constants
    - `sealChallengeEarliest` set to be equal to the number of epochs in 180 days.
      
### Proof changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when prove-committing a new sector
    - `RegisteredSealProof::StackedDrg32GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep`
    - `RegisteredSealProof::StackedDrg64GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep`
- Related constants
    - `NI_porep_min_challenges` set to 2253, the theoretical minimum number for 128 bits of security;
    - `NUM_CHALLENGES` computed as the smallest multiple of 18 that is also larger or equal to  `NI_porep_min_challenges` (indeed in practice, due to existing contraints in the trusted SNARK setup and circuit design, the number of challenges used has to be a multiple of 18).
- New challenge generation function:
    
    ```rust
    // That's the sector size in bytes divided by the node size (32 bytes).
    const SECTOR_NODES: u32
    const NUM_CHALLENGES = 2268
    // The `tag` is a domain separation tag, which is just a list of bytes.
    fn gen_porep_challenges(tag: [u8], ReplicaID: [u8; 32], CommR: [u8; 32]):
    for i in 0..NUM_CHALLENGES {
        digest: [u8; 32] = sha256(tag || le_bytes(ReplicaID) || le_bytes(CommR) || le_bytes(i))
        bigint = u256::from_le_u32s(digest)
        challenge: u32 = (bigint % (SECTOR_NODES - 1)) + 1
    }
    ```  

NI-PoRep is an *optional* feature that can be opt-in for those interested. The previously available proof types can be used with existing onboarding methods to continue interactive PoRep behavior.

### Gas calculations

According to [FIP-0013](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md#gas-calculations), for the verification of N aggregated Groth16 proofs (ie, circuits) the total gas charged is 
- 32GiB sector: 449900*N/10 + Constant32(N)
- 64GiB sector: 359280*N/10 + Constant64(N),
  
where Constant32(N) and Constant64(N) are as follows:

| Number of circuits aggregated, N      | Number of interactive PoRep proofs aggregated | Number of NI-PoRep proofs aggregated, k | Constant32(N) | Constant64(N) |
| ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |  ----------- |  ----------- |
| ≤ 64 = 2^6  | ≤ 6         | - | 103’994’170 | 102’581’240 |
| ≤ 128 = 2^7 | ≤12 | 1 | 112’356’810| 110’803’030|
| ≤ 256 = 2^8  | ≤ 25 | 2 | 122’912’610 | 120’803’700|
| ≤ 512 = 2^9 | ≤ 51 | ≤ 4 | 137’559’930 | 134’642’130 |
| ≤1024 = 2^10 | ≤ 102 | ≤ 8 | 162’039’100 | 157’357’890 |
| ≤ 2048 = 2^11 | ≤ 204 | ≤ 16 | 210’960’780 | 203’017’690 |
| ≤ 4096 = 2^12 | ≤ 409 | ≤ 32 | 318’351’180 | 304’253’590 |
| ≤ 8192 = 2^13 | ≤ 819 | ≤ 65 | 528’274’980 | 509’880’640 |

Since one NI-PoRep proof (128 bits of security) corresponds to aggregating 126 circuits, the gas units for the verification of one NI-PoRep proof is given by:

32GiB sector: 44990*126 + 112356810 = 118025550

64GiB sector: 35928*126 + 110803030 = 115329958 

**Aggregation**:

The minimum number of sector NI-PoRep proofs that may be aggregated is 1, and the maximum is 65. Using the same formula as above, the gas charged for verification of k NI-PoRep proofs (128 bits) is equal to 

32GiB sector: 44990 * 126 * k + Constant32(126 * k) 

64GiB sector: 35928 * 126 * k + Constant64(126 * k) 

Usually `GasUsed * BaseFee` is burned for every message. However, for aggregated batches of proofs (for example, ProveCommitSectorsAggregate and ProveReplicaUpdates3 messages), we charge an additional proportional fee introduced in FIP0013 and updated in FIP0024. With NI-PoRep, when aggregating at most 5 sectors (i.e. k ≤ 5), the per sector gas cost is already larger than the current value (~34721049), and therefore, in this case, there is no need for any additional fee. On the other hand, when aggregating 6 or more sectors, the additional fee is needed again. In this case, the fee is computed using the current function used for interactive proofs (`PayBatchGasCharge` function, as stated in [FIP0024](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0024.md#specification)) but passing as input the number of proofs - 5.

We ran benchmarks and obtained the following proof sizes for 65 aggregated proofs:
- For 32GiB NI-PoReps: 40948 bytes

## Design Rationale

The current PoRep is interactive, and it is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. At PreCommit, the SP puts down a collateral (PCD) and waits 150 epochs in order to receive a challenge seed from the chain, which enables the ProveCommit step. 
A first step to mitigate the downsides of the waiting time was the introduction of Synthetic PoRep (See [FIP-0059](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0059.md)), which reduces the size of the temporary data stored between PreCommit and ProveCommit. 
NI-PoRep is a further step forward, completely foregoing on-chain interaction (ie, the waiting time) and the need of PCD by allowing SP to locally generate challenges instead of using on-chain randomness. 

NI-PoRep has little downside with respect to the status quo: it removes PreCommit at the cost of augmenting C2 (ie SNARK generation) costs, which would result in a limited cost increase looking at onboarding costs as a whole. Indeed, NI-PoRep requires 12.8x more PoRep Challenges, which translates into a 12.8x SNARK proving overhead. We analyzed how this SNARK computation overhead affects overall costs. The conclusion is that considering PC1+PC2+C1+C2 and storage costs (i.e. not considering maintenance costs), a NI-PoRep sector with 128 bits of security is 5% more expensive than an Interactive PoRep sector when sector duration is 3y. See full analysis [here](../resources/fip-0090/NIPoRep_CostAnalysis.pdf).

The new onboarding method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` is restricted to CC-sectors. We decided for this design for the following reasons:
1. We believe that the main users of NI-PoRep will be SaaS Providers, which will use NI-PoRep for CC sectors anyway. In the SaaS scenario, the flow where the SP ships the data over to an SaaS Provider and then gets back the sealed data (replica) seems more complex (and therefore more expensive in practice) than the flow where the SaaS Provider distributes CC sectors and then the SP can snap the data later. This should be especially true if [FIP0082](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0082.md) (SuperSnap) were deployed in the network.
2. We think that restricting the new onboarding method to CC sectors can simplify the storage pipeline for Filecoin. Currently, there are quite a few different flows for onboarding data; having such diversity (ie, complexity) can be a source of risk and can slow down protocol development. It also complicates the SP stack software and new SP onboarding. If NI-PoRep (restricted to CC sectors) is widely adopted, we may come to consider the "CC+Snap" flow as the standard and deprecate older onboarding methods. Note that beyond a simplified pipeline, the "CC+Snap" flow allows for the possibility of new features. For a sector that is onboarded as CC, we have the `SectorKey` proved on-chain, meaning we can support re-snap (sector data to be replaced more than once) and proof-of-access to unsealed copy protocols.
3. Implementation of the NI-PoRep onboarding method is simplified by only supporting CC sectors. Data sectors add significant code complexity in the miner actor to support two different ways of committing to data.

## Backwards Compatibility

NI-PoRep would become a new proof type with a different on-chain flow than the current PoRep (due to the removal of the `PreCommit` step). A new method, `ProveCommitSectorNI,` is added, and the existing ProveCommit methods (i.e., `ProveCommitSector`, `ProveCommitAggregate`, `ProveCommitSectors3`) will not accept NI-PoRep proof. 

## Test Cases

Run the code for NI-PoRep and check if the resulting proof cryptographically verifies (ie, run the verification software). Test cases will be included with implementation to be presented.

**Caller Specified proving deadline for NI-PoRep**
- All sectors are scheduled in the requested deadline
    - with 1 sector
    - with > 1 partition of sectors
- Invalid proving deadline is rejected
- Current/next proving deadline is rejected

## Security Considerations

### Fiat-Shamir Heuristic and its effects

NI-PoRep is based on the well-known Fiat-Shamir Heuristic, which allows for a non-interactive protocol starting from any 3-message interactive protocol. However, the heuristic requires the original interactive protocol to have at least 80 [bits of security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Security_level) (instead of the current 10), and preferably 128. In order to have long-term security, we propose to opt for 128 bits: since the security level in PoRep is given by the number of challenges, this means that for NI-PoRep, we need  `NIChallengesNumber` to be at least 2253. 

### How to take `SealRandomness` to ensure sectors are anchored to the chain

The epoch in which sealing took place is identified by the corresponding chain reference, called `SealRandomness` which is the anchor of the sector to the chain. `SealRandomness` must be taken from the VRF chain, in order to ensure that no other fork can replay the Seal.

On the one hand, `SealRandomness` needs to be taken from finalized blocks, but it can not be taken farther back than necessary (to protect against long-range attacks). This means that `SealRandomness` needs to be verified.

Given that NI-PoRep removes on-chain interaction, `SealRandomness` verification becomes more difficult, but it is still necessary to protect the chain against the same class of attacks mentioned above.

We set up a validity time window which holds for all the sectors committed onchain together. We set this window, called `sealChallengeEarliest`, to be the number of epochs in 180 days.

This means that if PC1, PC2, C1, and C2 happen locally over time, resulting in different sectors sealed at different moments in time and committed on-chain at the end of the process, all sectors committed together should have randomness that is not older than `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs in the past. As a result, a NI-PoRep step needs to be completed within `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs overall to be valid.

### Impact of caller-specified proving deadlines on network load

Automatic proving scheduling was motivated by caution about overloading the network at particular times of day with too many Window PoSTs due at the same time. However, since the introduction of the FVM and a robust gas model, the network itself is not at much risk from this anymore. We might reasonably expect SPs to make reasonable scheduling decisions to optimize their own cost and risk profile, given knowledge and expectations about the scheduling of other SPs

A Window PoST for every sector must still be submitted every 24 hours.

The Window PoST dispute window is 1800 epochs (15 hours). The worst case impact on the minimum cost to dispute a Window PoST is thus when all partitions are scheduled uniformly across a 15-hour period: then a dispute for the first deadline must compete with PoST submissions in the last (or some prior deadline). This would affect gas availability only if the network were above 67% of capacity for Window PoST throughput. Window PoST today is <10% of gas utilisation.

## Addressing concerns regarding the removal of interactivity

Concerns were raised over the possibility that a malicious party wanting to take over the network could potentially keep accumulating sectors locally before onboarding them to the network all at once. [Our analysis](../resources/fip-0090/interactionRemoval.pdf) shows that no additional security risks are introduced with respect to Interactive PoRep. The security of both pathways can be improved by decoupling the power table lookback from consensus, which may be a subject for a future FIP.

## Incentive Considerations

NI-PoRep will implement the batch balancer currently in place. See [FIP-0013](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md) and the Section "Gas calculations" above for details.
## Product Considerations

NI-PoRep represents another step forward after the introduction of Synthetic PoRep (see [FIP-0059](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0059.md)). 

As already mentioned above, NI-PoRep is a prerequisite to unblock new use cases like trustless SaaS and HDD wholesale and to allow SupraSeal software employment at full potential. Moreover, enabling trustless SaaS can lower the entry bar for new Storage Providers to join the network.

### Comparison against Interactive PoRep

We ran benchmarks on different systems to estimate costs accurately. We observe that the SNARK phase of NI-PoRep is consistently 12.5x-13x slower than Interactive PoRep, which is in line with expectations.

### Impact of SupraSeal

The SNARK phase consists of two distinct steps:
- The synthesis, which is a memory- and CPU-heavy operation
- The proving, which is GPU-heavy

The SupraSeal implementation only targets the proving, where we observe speedups between 6-10x. When the synthesis is also taken into account, then the overall improvements are 3-5x. This means that NI-PoRep with SupraSeal is only 2.5-4.5x slower than Interactive PoRep without SupraSeal.

The ratio between synthesis and proving time depends on the GPU, and consequently, so does the speedup. In particular, synthesis time tends to be dominant in newer GPUs, reducing the overall speedup.

For benchmark data, see: [SupraSeal C2 benchmarks](../resources/fip-0090/benchmarks.pdf).

## Implementations

* <https://github.com/filecoin-project/builtin-actors/pull/1537>

## Copyright Waiver

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
