---
fip: "0032"
title: Gas accounting model adjustment for non-programmable FVM
author: Raúl Kripalani (@raulkr), Steven Allen (@stebalien), Jakub Sztandera (@Kubuxu)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/316
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2022-03-08
spec-sections:
  - TBD
requires:
  - FIP-0030
  - FIP-0031
replaces: N/A
---

# FIP-0032: Gas accounting model adjustment for non-programmable FVM

## Simple Summary

This FIP is part of a two-FIP series that adjust the gas accounting model of the
Filecoin blockchain in preparation of user-programmable actors. This FIP focuses
on achieving high-fidelity gas accounting under the new Wasm runtime that
built-in system actors will migrate to as part of [FIP-0030] and [FIP-0031]. It
does not cover upcoming system features like actor deployment, actor dispatch,
actor loading, memory management, and more. Those will be covered in a future
FIP.

## Abstract

The current gas accounting model was designed to cover the execution of
predefined, trusted code developed by the Filecoin Core Devs.

With the arrival of the Filecoin Virtual Machine, the Filecoin network will gain
the capability to run untrusted code in the form of user-defined actors. Thus,
the gas accounting model needs to evolve to price arbitrary code.

This FIP evolves the current gas accounting model by introducing the concepts of
_execution gas_, _syscall gas_, and _extern gas_. Furthermore, this FIP revises
the IPLD state management fees to adapt to the new design.

This FIP is designed to accompany [FIP-0030] and [FIP-0031] under the same network
upgrade (Milestone 1 of the FVM roadmap).

## Change Motivation

Gas is an essential mechanism to (a) compensate the network for the computation
performed during the execution of transactions, (b) allocate chain bandwidth,
and to (c) restrict the compute capacity of blocks so that the designated epoch
time (30 seconds) can be sustained with contemporary hardware.

Today, transactions on the Filecoin network are charged gas on these operations:

- On including a chain message (variable gas units, based on length).
- On returning a value (variable gas units, based on length of returned
  payload).
- On performing a call (variable gas units, depending on whether it's a simple
  value transfer, or an invocation to actor logic).
- On performing an IPLD store get (fixed gas units).
- On performing an IPLD store put (variable gas units, based on block payload
  size).
- On actor creation (fixed gas units).
- On actor deletion (fixed gas units).
- On cryptographic operations:
    - On signature verification (variable gas units, depending on signature type
      and plaintext length).
    - On hashing (fixed gas units).
    - On computing the CID of an unsealed sector (variable gas units, based on
      proof type and piece properties).
    - On verifying a seal (variable gas units, based on seal properties).
    - On verifying a window PoSt (variable gas units, based on PoSt properties).
    - On verifying a consensus fault.

None of these gas charges accounts for the actual costs of the execution of the
actor's compute logic itself. This results in an imprecise resource accounting
system. So far, the network has coped without it because:

1. With the exception of some methods, the cost of most built-in actor logic is
   proportional to the cost of the above operations, most of which are triggered
   through syscalls.
2. Only pre-determined, trusted logic runs on chain in the form of built-in
   actors.
3. Technical limitations. Prior to the FVM ([FIP-0030], [FIP-0031]), there was no
   portable actor bytecode whose execution could be metered identically across
   all implementations.

With the ability to deploy user-defined actors on the FVM, these assumptions no
longer stand and it's vital to start tracking real execution costs with the
highest fidelity possible in order to preserve security guarantees.

## Specification

Here's an overview of proposed changes to the existing gas accounting model. We
explain each one in detail in the following sections.

- Introduce execution gas, metered by Wasm bytecode.
- Introduce syscall gas.
- Introduce extern gas.
- Redesign the IPLD state management fees.

### Execution gas

Execution gas is charged per [Wasm instruction][wasm-instructions]. Every Wasm
instruction expends a number of execution units, which can be static or dynamic
based on its parameters.

As part of this FIP, we assign a flat value of 1 execution unit for every Wasm
instruction, with the exception of structural instructions. These instructions
are: `nop`, `drop`, `block`, `loop`, `unreachable`, `return`, `else` and `end`.
The exemption is due to the fact that these Wasm instructions do not translate
into machine instructions by themselves, or they are control flow instructions
with no associated logic.

**Pricing formula**

The conversion of Wasm execution units to Filecoin gas units is at a fixed ratio
of 4gas per execution unit.

This ratio is consistent with the average instruction throughput observed in
benchmarks, and tracks the baseline target of 10 gas units/ns of wall clock
time.

```
p_gas_per_exec_unit := 4
```

**Future considerations**

1. Our benchmarks revealed that memory instructions perform differently to pure
   CPU-level instructions. They also exhibit high variance depending on the
   memory access pattern of the actor, CPU caching dynamics, and other factors.
   At this stage, we have opted to simplify the model by setting a fixed average
   rate for all instructions. But in the future, we may tabulate execution gas
   per instruction, or per instruction family.
2. The pricing policy for Wasm instructions and the conversion rate need to be
   assessed and revised continuously as Wasm compilers and hardware evolve. The
   ongoing goal is to sustain high execution fidelity.

### Syscall gas

Syscalls are host-provided functions exposed to actor code. They allow the actor
to traverse the sandbox in a controlled manner to:

- access data (e.g. state data, chain data, randomness).
- perform side effects (e.g. write to state).
- invoke operations that are more efficient to implement in native space than in
  Wasm (e.g. cryptograhic primitives).

Calling a syscall triggers a context switch out, and back in when execution
returns to Wasm. The syscall gas merely covers this overhead. It does not price
the actual work performed by the syscall; that work is charged for separately,
and is specific to every syscall.

**Pricing formula**

We have quantified the average context switch overhead to be equivalent to 3500
execution units. At the rate of 4 gas per execution unit, we set the syscall gas
price to be 14000 gas.

```
p_syscall_gas := 14000
```

**Future considerations**

The cost of syscall-driven context switches varies depending on the syscall, its
parameters, the amount of work it performs (thus invalidating CPU caches and
instruction pipeline), and other factors. In the future, we may tabulate syscall
gas depending on the complexity of the syscall, its arguments, its impact on CPU
optimizations, and more.

### Extern gas

Some syscalls cannot be resolved entirely within FVM space. Such syscalls need
to traverse the _extern_ (FVM <> Node) boundary to access client functionality.

Depending on the languages of the client and the FVM implementation, traversing
this boundary may involve foreign-function interface (FFI) mechanics. That is
indeed the case with the reference client (Lotus) and the reference FVM
(ref-fvm). This is the most common scenario today given the client distribution
of the network.

The associated overheads are:

- data structure translation between representations, including potential
  serialization overheads.
- context switch.
- the memory overhead on both sides of the interface.
- the amortized opportunity cost of dedicating OS threads to handle FFI calls.
- the amortized garbage collection or deallocation costs once the extern
  concludes.
- function lookup and dispatch.

**Pricing formulae**

Extern gas is priced at 1.5x syscall gas. It is equivalent to a flat 5250
execution units, and therefore it costs 21000 gas. Extern gas is additive to
syscall gas.

```
p_extern_gas := 21000
```

The following syscalls are extern-traversing syscalls, and therefore are subject
to extern gas:

- `rand::get_chain_randomness`.
- `rand::get_beacon_randomness`.
- `crypto::verify_consensus_fault`.
- `ipld::block_open`.

**Future considerations**

It may be possible to drop the extern traversal on randomness fetches, by
passing in a reference to a ring-buffer-like data structure (maintained by the
Node) on Machine construction. This data structure would hold 2*finality worth
of VRF proofs & beacons, for the FVM kernel to index into directly, thus
eliminating the extern access.

- The estimated size is 405Kb + data structure overhead (225 bytes of data per
  epoch x 1800 epochs).
- This future improvement is tracked under [filecoin-project/ref-fvm#525](https://github.com/filecoin-project/ref-fvm/issues/525)
  for the reference FVM implementation.

### IPLD state management gas

Currently, IPLD state block operations incur these fees:

- Reads incur a fixed fee.
- Writes incur a variable fee, based on the number of bytes written.

With the introduction of the FVM, the state management operations have evolved
from a two-method design to five syscalls:

- `ipld::block_open`
- `ipld::block_read`
- `ipld::block_write`
- `ipld::block_link`
- `ipld::block_stat`

For more details, refer to `ipld` namespace syscall catalogue in
[FIP-0030](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0030.md#namespace-ipld).

**memcpy per byte gas charge**

We introduce a gas charge for memcpy'ing bytes across system boundaries
(`p_memcpy_gas_per_byte`). The fee is 500 milligas per byte, resulting from
statistics collected on average memcpy latencies, adapted to the Filecoin gas
sizing baseline (10gas per ns).

```
p_memcpy_gas_per_byte := 0.5
```

**Memory retention per byte gas charge**

Some operations retain buffers in FVM Kernel and Machine space. We introduce a
gas charge to cover memory retention, modelled after a 1GB limit of memory usage
per transaction (worst case scenario, contemporary block validator hardware).

```
p_memret_gas_per_byte := 10
```

**Pricing for `ipld::block_open`**

_Overhead:_ This syscall traverses the FVM <> Node boundary via an extern to
access the state blockstore. The bytes returned through the extern are copied
into FVM kernel buffers; thus there is an memcpy and alloc cost (the latter is
absorbed into the former). The kernel buffers are retained until the actor call
finishes.

The pricing formula is:

```
p_blockopen_base_gas := 114617   # extant fee
op_ipld_blockopen := p_syscall_gas
                     + p_extern_gas
                     + p_blockopen_base_gas
                     + (p_memcpy_gas_per_byte * block_length)
                     + (p_memret_gas_per_byte * block_length)
```

**Pricing for `ipld::block_read`**

_Overhead:_ This syscall performs an memcpy from the FVM kernel's buffers to
Wasm memory.

The pricing formula is:

```
op_ipld_blockread := p_syscall_gas + (p_memcpy_gas_per_byte * byte_length)
```

**Pricing for `ipld::block_write`**

_Overhead:_ This syscall performs an memcpy from Wasm memory into the FVM
kernel's buffers, with a corresponding alloc (absorbed into the memcpy cost).
The kernel buffers are retained until the actor call finishes.

The pricing formula is:

```
op_ipld_blockwrite := p_syscall_gas
                      + (p_memcpy_gas_per_byte * block_length)
                      + (p_memret_gas_per_byte * block_length)
```

Future considerations:

- This call will likely become more expensive when user programmability is
  introduced as `ipld::block_write` will need to reason about data
  availability/reachability.

**Pricing for `ipld::block_link`**

_Overhead:_ This syscall incurs a hashing operation to compute the CID of the
block. It then copies it over to the buffered blockstore, where it is retained
until the Machine is flushed and the blocks are written to the Node's blockstore
via an extern. The extern is amortized across all the blocks written throughout
the Machine's lifetime, and the cost is included in the storage multiplier.

The pricing formula for compute gas is:

```
p_blocklink_base_gas := 353640    # extant fee
p_storage_gas_multiplier := 1300  # extant fee
op_ipld_blocklink_compute := p_syscall_gas
                             + p_blocklink_base_gas
                             + (p_memcpy_gas_per_byte * block_length * 2)
op_ipld_blocklink_storage := p_storage_gas_multiplier * block_length
op_ipld_blocklink := op_ipld_blocklink_compute + op_ipld_blocklink_storage
```

Note: we don't charge a memory retention cost here because it's already factored
into the base operation gas (this operation is equivalent in overhead to the
pre-FVM `StorePut`).

**Pricing for `ipld::block_stat`**

No relevant overhead.

The pricing formula is:

```
op_ipld_blockstat := p_syscall_gas
```

### Milligas precision and under/overflow handling

The unit of internal gas accounting is milligas (1e3 precision, increments of
1/1000). When message execution completes, or gas is queried by an actor, the
FVM rounds the _gas used_ up, and the _gas available_ down, to the nearest whole
gas.

Operations that have the potential of either underflowing or overflowing should
be performed using [saturation arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturation_arithmetic).
The valid range for any execution units operation, including total execution units
consumed, is [0, 2<sup>64</sup>-1]. 

The valid range for any gas operation, including gas available and total gas
used, is [0, (2<sup>63</sup>-1)/1000]. Internally, during message execution, gas
used may ephimerally turn negative as of Filecoin nv15 (gas refunds). Upon
concluding message execution, gas used is clamped to 0 on the lower bound, thus
effectively setting a floor of 0.

## Design Rationale

### Gas sizing baseline

We use a baseline of 10 gas/nanosecond of wall-clock time, or 1 milligas/10
picosecond. This baseline follows from the need to sustain a 30s epoch by
validating and applying unique messages in a tipset, with a block count
following a Poisson distribution (win rate), with a 10B block gas limit,
assuming 6s of block propagation time.

### Benchmark methodology

The parameters for this FIP were calculated through extensive benchmarking using
three profiling techniques to obtain a performance data from various vantage
points:

1. Fine-grained tracing of 2.5MM mainnet message applications.
2. Aggregated execution statistics of 2.5MM mainnet messages.
3. Raw Wasmtime micro-benchmarks.

The machines had the following specs: 1 x AMD EPYC 7402P, 24 cores @ 2.8 GHz, 2
x 240GiB SSD (boot), 2 x 480GiB SSD (storage), 64GiB DDR4 RAM, running Debian
4.19.208-1.

The code assets for (1) and (2) are available at
[filecoin-project/ref-fvm#465](https://github.com/filecoin-project/ref-fvm/pull/465).

The raw Wasmtime micro-benchmarker is available at
[filecoin-project/ref-fvm#502](https://github.com/filecoin-project/ref-fvm/pull/502).

Benchmarking overheads were measured and corrected for in the data.

## Backwards Compatibility

External-facing gas representation (gas limit, gas used, etc.) remains
unchanged.

However, the gas usage of most messages will increase upwards, so systems using
static gas limits should be adapted accordingly.

Clients sending messages near the activation epoch of this FIP should estimate
gas under the new pricing model to guarantee inclusion.

- If the message is included pre-activation, the message will result in a higher
  overestimation burn.
- If the message is included post-activation, the message will be executed
  normally.

## Test Cases

Refer to test plan laid out in [FIP-0031].

## Security Considerations

Metering and pricing execution enables more precise gas accounting, which
translates into higher network security.

Note that this FIP alone is insufficient to secure the network for
user-programmed actors; it is merely a stepping stone. A future FIP will
introduce further the final gas accounting model changes before enabling user
programmability.

## Incentive Considerations

> ⚠️ Data is stale; will be updated with results from new backtest shortly.

The gas utilization of all messages will increase, except for value transfers
which are unaffected.

In order to quantify the magnitude of change, we have backtested this model
against 2.5MM mainnet messages.

- Annex A includes a detailed breakdown of net utilization increase per message
  type (relative to original gas).
- Annex B includes the final total gas per message type.

On average, most message types increase their utilization between 1.5-3x. The
gas performance of specific messages types is subject to various factors. The
reader is advised to study Annex A to understand the variability involved.

In our backtest, the four most important messages for storage provider
operations were impacted in this manner:

- SubmitWindowPoSt (miner actor): gas usage increases an average of 3x, with a
  median of 2.73x, and a 90% percentile score of 4.42x. Some executions spiked
  as much as 14x. These are likely window PoSt submissions that recovered power,
  as the resulting work has a significant computational cost that was not
  previously accounted for.
- PreCommitSector (miner actor): gas usage increases an average of 3x, with a
  median of 2.37x, and a 90% percentile score of 5x. Some executions spiked as
  much as 9x.
- ProveCommitSector (miner actor): gas usage increases an average of 1.21x, with
  an identical median, and a 90% percentile score of 1.26x. Some executions
  spiked as much as 2.7x.
- PublishStorageDeals (market actor): gas usage increases an average of 1.71x,
  with a median of 1.75x, and a 90% percentile score of 1.92x. Some executions
  spiked as much as 2x.

These two message types deserve special attention.

- DeclareFaultsRecovered (miner actor): highest variability between executions
  and highest multiplier; on average, gas cost increases 8x, with some instances
  spiking as much as 30x in the backtest. All executions were within the block
  gas limit.
- ExtendSectorExpiration (miner actor): infrequent; was already an expensive
  message. Some executions lead to gas usage beyoned the block limit, rendering
  them inviable (up to 2.2e10 gas). However, this is a batched message, so
  clients should size batches within gas limits.

On average, we observe a global increase of 1.87x in gas utilization, if the
current chain activity were to remain unchanged. However, the HyperDrive upgrade
introduced power onboarding batching mechanisms in [FIP-0008] and [FIP-0013]
that have stayed underutilized. We expect these to kick in an adaptive response
to lower usage and increase chain bandwidth again.

At last, we expect upwards pressure on the base fee, due to two factors:

- higher chain bandwidth utilization.
- message executions more frequently surpassing the base fee target (50% of
  block gas limit, i.e. 5B).

## Product Considerations

1. Messages get more expensive. See Incentive Considerations section for a
   synthesis, and Annex A and Annex B for raw data.
2. Potential for higher community motivation to optimize built-in actors logic,
   as doing so directly translates into cost reductions.
3. Messages estimated pre-FVM will likely not be executed post-FVM. See
   Backwards Compatibility section for ways to mitigate.
4. Expect higher usage of aggregated forms of PreCommitSector and
   ProveCommitSector, as they become more cost-effective under the new gas
   scenario.
5. Clients may need to re-evaluate thresholds for batched operations, so as to
   avoid generating inviable messages due to exceeding the block gas limit.

## Implementation

For clients relying on the reference FVM implementation
([filecoin-project/ref-fvm](https://github.com/filecoin-project/ref-fvm)), the
implementation of this FIP will be transparent, as it is self-contained inside
the FVM.

## Annex A: Table of gas utilization increase per message type

> ⚠️ Data is stale; will be updated with results from new backtest shortly.

|                        |        | gas\_utilization\_increase |             |                |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| ---------------------- | ------ | -------------------------- | ----------- | -------------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |
|                        |        | count                      | mean        | std            | min         | 50%         | 60%         | 70%         | 80%         | 90%         | 95%         | 99%         | max         |
| code                   | method |                            |             |                |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| fil/7/account          | 0      | 45875                      | 1.005917762 | 0.02417353413  | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1.104362264 | 1.104684688 | 1.115612956 |
| fil/7/init             | 2      | 6                          | 1.424152199 | 0.003497993647 | 1.420961258 | 1.423357446 | 1.424705436 | 1.425673293 | 1.426641151 | 1.42812825  | 1.428871799 | 1.429466639 | 1.429615349 |
| fil/7/multisig         | 0      | 111                        | 1           | 0              | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           |
| fil/7/multisig         | 2      | 1838                       | 1.49888439  | 0.1256852181   | 1.455639985 | 1.470335469 | 1.470415198 | 1.470625796 | 1.471129685 | 1.481508548 | 1.587097983 | 2.20239369  | 2.351119604 |
| fil/7/multisig         | 3      | 467                        | 1.983014254 | 0.4273290074   | 1.401773916 | 1.916782957 | 1.969174962 | 2.249158069 | 2.453986925 | 2.676459729 | 2.740818207 | 2.837620526 | 2.957000268 |
| fil/7/multisig         | 4      | 1                          | 1.541821859 |                | 1.541821859 | 1.541821859 | 1.541821859 | 1.541821859 | 1.541821859 | 1.541821859 | 1.541821859 | 1.541821859 | 1.541821859 |
| fil/7/paymentchannel   | 0      | 1                          | 1           |                | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           |
| fil/7/storagemarket    | 2      | 2586                       | 1.677846797 | 0.01641321941  | 1.622797511 | 1.675575666 | 1.680067456 | 1.68604039  | 1.690120693 | 1.706057689 | 1.706908548 | 1.707587268 | 1.710623822 |
| fil/7/storagemarket    | 3      | 1                          | 1.835677528 |                | 1.835677528 | 1.835677528 | 1.835677528 | 1.835677528 | 1.835677528 | 1.835677528 | 1.835677528 | 1.835677528 | 1.835677528 |
| fil/7/storagemarket    | 4      | 5265                       | 1.713832195 | 0.167006235    | 1.378324013 | 1.747459302 | 1.756717183 | 1.789865482 | 1.857274123 | 1.915473598 | 1.937876891 | 1.974763644 | 2.036444245 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 0      | 22                         | 1           | 0              | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           | 1           |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 3      | 33                         | 1.544150097 | 0.01762076733  | 1.516727174 | 1.538374672 | 1.552194181 | 1.553229183 | 1.55397207  | 1.57235456  | 1.572710246 | 1.579623494 | 1.582876787 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 4      | 56                         | 1.398619224 | 0.008946785601 | 1.37256878  | 1.399053273 | 1.402824374 | 1.403470248 | 1.405743523 | 1.406549884 | 1.406658139 | 1.415199818 | 1.415937618 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 5      | 217106                     | 3.001380622 | 1.291170636    | 1.073645329 | 2.731878913 | 3.112291315 | 3.497449584 | 3.903461537 | 4.423025069 | 5.164439561 | 7.807636626 | 14.46421024 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 6      | 1185994                    | 3.026592891 | 1.496389648    | 1           | 2.379804446 | 2.55861521  | 3.023486067 | 4.010961794 | 5.015472983 | 6.42727476  | 8.687420506 | 9.667892479 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 7      | 1053956                    | 1.213380855 | 0.0372125817   | 1           | 1.210958768 | 1.220186923 | 1.230795355 | 1.243780613 | 1.261473526 | 1.275400176 | 1.309423389 | 2.694420812 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 8      | 30                         | 2.475374133 | 0.854622837    | 1.600038973 | 2.122905573 | 2.285529193 | 2.754937489 | 3.131700562 | 4.006707012 | 4.032028248 | 4.07123791  | 4.082966433 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 9      | 104                        | 2.645544754 | 0.6874569231   | 1.851345598 | 2.325670753 | 2.674528085 | 3.133873234 | 3.219849741 | 3.336542645 | 3.562847759 | 5.283788788 | 5.42050949  |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 11     | 1617                       | 7.994836886 | 7.31229865     | 1.623235513 | 3.789194292 | 4.56465667  | 9.842812607 | 16.26378321 | 21.55095991 | 22.24913297 | 25.58566865 | 30.6684894  |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 16     | 1310                       | 2.070571714 | 0.048140412    | 1.53773354  | 2.070956394 | 2.074284782 | 2.077834587 | 2.07906097  | 2.08010869  | 2.081971072 | 2.215612748 | 2.248252248 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 18     | 18                         | 1.405288395 | 0.01107401339  | 1.379686399 | 1.409628134 | 1.412962602 | 1.412962602 | 1.412990164 | 1.413025152 | 1.414754664 | 1.422595114 | 1.424555227 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 22     | 2                          | 1.529627586 | 0.000634365616 | 1.529179022 | 1.529627586 | 1.529717299 | 1.529807012 | 1.529896725 | 1.529986437 | 1.530031294 | 1.530067179 | 1.53007615  |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 23     | 37                         | 1.407758291 | 0.006237523785 | 1.389591234 | 1.409438265 | 1.409447888 | 1.409982494 | 1.411901489 | 1.415315811 | 1.415396266 | 1.416970863 | 1.41776426  |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 25     | 7485                       | 2.691826778 | 0.8558509903   | 1           | 2.321657516 | 2.494654692 | 2.730209544 | 2.95191148  | 3.338231379 | 4.875076008 | 5.925291961 | 8.682704739 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 26     | 5812                       | 1.824601816 | 0.3903509537   | 1           | 1.809926428 | 2.008929727 | 2.153521744 | 2.210637829 | 2.34720221  | 2.420199167 | 2.594294262 | 3.067947064 |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 27     | 81                         | 1.658007365 | 0.125914532    | 1.586545298 | 1.622265586 | 1.627453668 | 1.630537788 | 1.644412417 | 1.735504031 | 1.83589129  | 2.054537246 | 2.608683685 |
| fil/7/storagepower     | 2      | 34                         | 1.407148482 | 0.006099455023 | 1.396422735 | 1.406812581 | 1.408610707 | 1.409677967 | 1.412416786 | 1.413962019 | 1.416608818 | 1.421315733 | 1.421459694 |
| fil/7/verifiedregistry | 4      | 11                         | 1.708255928 | 0.03427059356  | 1.613045556 | 1.715087058 | 1.727790793 | 1.727790793 | 1.728131584 | 1.728131584 | 1.732089921 | 1.735256591 | 1.736048258 |

## Annex B: Table of total final gas used per message type

> ⚠️ Data is stale; will be updated with results from new backtest shortly.

|                        |        | final\_total\_gas |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| ---------------------- | ------ | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- | ----------------- |
|                        |        | mean              | std               | min               | 50%               | 60%               | 70%               | 80%               | 90%               | 95%               | 99%               | max               |
| code                   | method |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| fil/7/account          | 0      | 579409.7915       | 429519.4004       | 278696            | 491868            | 491868            | 491868            | 493168            | 495768            | 2324166           | 2330666           | 2.41E+06          |
| fil/7/init             | 2      | 17781412.17       | 696179.9125       | 16623282          | 18086790.5        | 18176750          | 18247688          | 18318626          | 18324294          | 18327128          | 18329395.2        | 1.83E+07          |
| fil/7/multisig         | 0      | 443475.2072       | 23048.51686       | 415168            | 441168            | 441168            | 442468            | 443768            | 493168            | 493168            | 493168            | 4.94E+05          |
| fil/7/multisig         | 2      | 5718685.411       | 2208331.469       | 3505155           | 5551322           | 5551430           | 5555010           | 5559042           | 5563194           | 5602762.4         | 16927459.03       | 2.86E+07          |
| fil/7/multisig         | 3      | 13089448.95       | 11295552.62       | 980841            | 7875274           | 11594475.8        | 13273839.4        | 24268318.4        | 33403239.4        | 39205587.9        | 43247276.94       | 4.68E+07          |
| fil/7/multisig         | 4      | 1963800           |                   | 1963800           | 1963800           | 1963800           | 1963800           | 1963800           | 1963800           | 1963800           | 1963800           | 1.96E+06          |
| fil/7/paymentchannel   | 0      | 486668            |                   | 486668            | 486668            | 486668            | 486668            | 486668            | 486668            | 486668            | 486668            | 4.87E+05          |
| fil/7/storagemarket    | 2      | 18658574.86       | 454077.0529       | 17562351          | 18544233          | 18608937          | 18941817          | 19128285          | 19358113          | 19358525          | 19620838          | 2.01E+07          |
| fil/7/storagemarket    | 3      | 21311223          |                   | 21311223          | 21311223          | 21311223          | 21311223          | 21311223          | 21311223          | 21311223          | 21311223          | 2.13E+07          |
| fil/7/storagemarket    | 4      | 413098051.9       | 456514759.8       | 62609741          | 274519626         | 323602629.6       | 390909198.8       | 804501094.4       | 848560675.6       | 899647959.8       | 2399155869        | 2.51E+09          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 0      | 440636.1818       | 33021.16762       | 417768            | 419718            | 420368            | 454038            | 488228            | 493168            | 495638            | 495768            | 4.96E+05          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 3      | 2970019.333       | 153251.3482       | 2839834           | 2919498           | 2935451.6         | 2945915.6         | 2976917.2         | 3289962           | 3291262           | 3366407.44        | 3.40E+06          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 4      | 2456042.929       | 44191.62383       | 2342681           | 2456285           | 2466749           | 2484329           | 2490017           | 2506197           | 2506217           | 2536646.8         | 2.55E+06          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 5      | 49325398.39       | 118929811.8       | 1232629           | 29188449          | 37883753          | 48594377          | 63468177          | 86918525          | 111985444         | 276914415.2       | 6.41E+09          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 6      | 56458501.82       | 63947144.45       | 335919            | 32108687.5        | 35849884          | 45418728.2        | 71098269.6        | 109499571         | 177697999.4       | 362337308.9       | 4.74E+08          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 7      | 63212651.66       | 10396509.62       | 2759119           | 59943629.5        | 61962740          | 64745426.5        | 69255889          | 77938907          | 86465080          | 99034156.9        | 1.16E+08          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 8      | 5923900902        | 8488049980        | 30109967          | 55852976          | 114347305         | 14684231504       | 15813293994       | 18256026495       | 21000904981       | 21841083236       | 2.21E+10          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 9      | 140124538.2       | 180483871.8       | 26287943          | 77307069          | 111148019.2       | 142634143.4       | 177574561.8       | 281637724.5       | 315400143.8       | 1078709063        | 1.46E+09          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 11     | 204665314.7       | 376419840.6       | 9919102           | 47424103          | 71018922.6        | 149524682         | 375670781.2       | 492306799         | 822904774.6       | 1906198407        | 3.57E+09          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 16     | 19651993.88       | 1888459.502       | 2248690           | 19701951          | 19825190.2        | 20041409.4        | 20197906.2        | 20293339.8        | 20369485.2        | 24298785.68       | 2.47E+07          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 18     | 2418888.778       | 54381.4127        | 2307709           | 2437505           | 2458993           | 2460548.2         | 2460721           | 2460745           | 2467150.8         | 2495936.56        | 2.50E+06          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 22     | 1882349           | 780.6458864       | 1881797           | 1882349           | 1882459.4         | 1882569.8         | 1882680.2         | 1882790.6         | 1882845.8         | 1882889.96        | 1.88E+06          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 23     | 2399027.162       | 39271.81082       | 2297917           | 2390897           | 2404683.4         | 2410034.6         | 2428113           | 2460138.6         | 2466193           | 2467298.92        | 2.47E+06          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 25     | 205075794.5       | 246405489.4       | 341119            | 129018156         | 171290249.6       | 214444773.4       | 262631188         | 528939775.8       | 821176234.2       | 1136975105        | 1.22E+09          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 26     | 800031825.5       | 669882830.6       | 30303519          | 500804676         | 744232712.6       | 968439482.1       | 1441497470        | 1590315837        | 2134948503        | 3211731807        | 4.46E+09          |
| fil/7/storageminer     | 27     | 131104891.6       | 16659267          | 118694053         | 127452754         | 128680966         | 130334894         | 133403222         | 143053434         | 150992827         | 196388620         | 2.44E+08          |
| fil/7/storagepower     | 2      | 39499528.15       | 570366.4107       | 38100738          | 39422212          | 39596833.2        | 39714364.8        | 39939416.2        | 40381566.7        | 40482234.35       | 40534859          | 4.05E+07          |
| fil/7/verifiedregistry | 4      | 12602227          | 768599.3907       | 11795753          | 12229826          | 12230694          | 13406634          | 13406634          | 13457143          | 13674671.5        | 13848694.3        | 1.39E+07          |

## Acknowledgements

Credits to:

- [@magik6k](https://github.com/magik6k) for inputs throughout the design process.
- [@arajasek](https://github.com/arajasek) for the initial implementation of FIP-0032 in ref-fvm.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via
[CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

[wasm-instructions]: https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/syntax/instructions.html
[FIP-0008]: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0008.md
[FIP-0013]: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md
[FIP-0030]: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0030.md
[FIP-0031]: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0031.md