---
fip: "0072"
title: Improved Event Syscall API
author: Fridrik Asmundsson (@fridrik01), Steven Allen (@stebalien)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/775
status: Draft
type: Technical Core
created: 2023-08-10
---

## Simple Summary

Revise the internal [`emit_event`](https://docs.rs/fvm_sdk/latest/fvm_sdk/sys/event/fn.emit_event.html) syscall by replacing the single CBOR encoded `ActorEvent` parameter with three separate fixed-sized byte arrays. This change enhances gas charge accuracy and eliminates the need for parsing.

## Abstract

The current procedure for emitting an event through the FVM SDK involves sending an `ActorEvent` structure as input. This structure is encoded into a byte array with CBOR formatting and then sent to the kernel.

Inside the kernel, complete CBOR deserialization is necessary before any validation can occur, which results in an upfront gas charge. However, accurately estimating the gas charge is challenging, as the original size of the `ActorEvent` remains unknown until the CBOR byte array is fully deserialized. Consequently, to ensure sufficient gas, a slightly higher gas fee is imposed, making this process more costly than necessary.

## Change Motivation

This proposal aims to optimize the `emit_event` syscall by eliminating the need for CBOR encoding altogether. This change enables precise gas charging since the original size of the `ActorEvent` is known including total sizes of key and value lengths allowing us to charge them separately in addition to fixed overhead of each event entry.

Moreover, the current gas charge is estimated based on the cost of emitting EVM events and won't be accurate for general events emitted by Wasm actors. Thus, we propose a new approach to calculating the gas cost, which should account for any type of emitted events.

Furthermore, this proposal allows validation to be performed concurrently during the deserialization of the input.

## Specification

Currently the [`emit_event`](https://docs.rs/fvm_sdk/latest/fvm_sdk/sys/event/fn.emit_event.html) syscall is defined as:

```rust
pub fn emit_event(
    event_off: *const u8,
    event_len: u32
) -> Result<()>;
```

The syscall takes in `event_off` and `event_len` which refer to a pointer and length in WASM memory where the CBOR encoded `ActorEvent` has been written. An `ActorEvent` structure is defined as:

```rust
pub struct ActorEvent {
    pub entries: Vec<Entry>,
}

pub struct Entry {
    pub flags: Flags,
    pub key: String,
    pub codec: u64,
    pub value: Vec<u8>,
}
```

### Proposed change

We propose changing the `emit_event` syscall shown above to the following:

```rust
pub fn emit_event(
    event_off: *const EventEntry,
    event_len: u32,
    key_off: *const u8,
    key_len: u32,
    value_off: *const u8,
    value_len: u32,
) -> Result<()>;
```

We also introduce a new struct `EventEntry` which is encoded as a packed tuple in field order `(u64, u64, u32, u32)` where `flags`/`codec` fields are copied from `Entry` directly and `key_size`/`value_size` are the size (in bytes) of their respective `key`/`value` fields in `Entry`:

```rust
#[repr(C, packed)]
pub struct EventEntry {
    pub flags: u64,   // copy of Entry::flags
    pub codec: u64 ,  // copy Entry::codec
    pub key_size: u32, // Entry::key.len()
    pub value_size: u32, // Entry::value.len()
}
```

In the new `emit_event` syscall, instead of taking the whole `ActorEvent` data encoded using CBOR, this proposed version splits the `ActorEvent` instance into three different buffers that each refer to a pointer and length in WASM memory where their data has been written.  They are as follows:
- `event_off/event_len`: Pointer to an array of `EventEntry` where `event_len` is the number of elements in the array.
- `key_off/key_len`: Pointer to a buffer of size `key_len` bytes of all the keys from each entry are concatenated.
- `value_off/value_len`: Pointer to a buffer of size `value_len` bytes of all the values from each entry are concatenated.

This syscall will:

1. Validate that the pointers passed to the syscall are in-bounds.
2. Validate that the actor is not currently executing in "read-only" mode. If so, the syscall fail with a "ReadOnly" (13) syscall error.
3. Charge gas as described below.
4. Validate the event.
5. Record the event.

Importantly, implementations must charge gas before validating.

### Serialization

The serialization from the syscall to FVM is implemented as follows:

Given an `ActorEvent` with _N_ number of `Entry` elements, declare three buffers:
- `entries` an array of `EventEntry` of size _N_.
- `keys` a byte buffer of size equal to the total number of keys in all entries.
- `values` a buffer of size equal to the total number of values in all entries.

Then for each entry `e` in `ActorEvent`:
- Create `EventEntry` from `e` as described above and add it to `entries`.
- Add `e.keys` to the `keys` buffer.
- Add `e.values` to the `values` buffer.

Deserialization in FVM is done in a similar fashion where we read each `EventEntry` from `entries` and create a new `Entry` object by using the flags/codec from `EventEntry` and reconstructing its keys/values by reading exactly `key_size`/`value_size` from `keys`/`values` respectively.

### Validation

In the FVM we perform the following validation while deserializing the input:

1. Initial validation:
    1. Validate that the size of `entries` is 255 or less. Previously 256 entries were accepted but reducing it by 1 ensures that the resulting CBOR encoding can store the length in a single byte.
    2. Validate that the size of `values` does not exceed 8KiB.
    3. Validate that the keys are valid utf8 (validate the entire buffer, all at once).
2. For each event entry `ee` in `entries`:
    1. Validate that the `ee.flags` bits are valid (see [FIP-0049#New chain types](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/6c2be9a09a7f03f16aa5f635e4beadeaa9c4fb3b/FIPS/fip-0049.md#new-chain-types) for more details).
    2. Validate that the `ee.key_size` is 31 bytes or less and starts/ends on unicode character boundaries. Previously 32 byte sized keys were accepted but reducing it by 1 ensures compact CBOR encoding.
    3. Validate that the `ee.value_size` is 8Kib or less.
    4. Validate that the `ee.codec` is acceptable. Currently, only `IPLD_RAW` (0x55) is allowed.

### Gas

This FIP makes an adjustment to the gas cost when emitting an event as originally defined in [FIP-0049#Gas costs](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/6c2be9a09a7f03f16aa5f635e4beadeaa9c4fb3b/FIPS/fip-0049.md#gas-costs). Instead of having a separate gas fee for validation and processing of an event, we instead charge a single upfront gas fee covering both validation and processing. This fee is applied after checking for read-only but before any other validation, allocation, or deserialization is performed as described in the specification above.

Notable changes from previous gas fee is that we:
- Removed the indexing cost associated with specifying flags that indicate that keys/values should be indexed by the client. This was not used and therefore removed here.
- We charge an additional memory allocation per event.
- Refactored the gas charges allowing us to tune gas for entry and key validation separately.

We define 4 new gas charge parameters:

| Name                             | Gas  | Comment                      |
|----------------------------------|------|------------------------------|
| `p_gas_event`                    | 2000 | Base fee per event emitted   |
| `p_gas_event_per_entry`          | 1400 | Fee per entry in the event   |
| `p_gas_utf8_validation`          | 500  | Base fee for utf8 validation |
| `p_gas_utf8_validation_per_byte` | 16   | Per-byte utf8 validation fee |

We also use the following existing gas parameters:

| Name                         | Gas | Comment                   |
|------------------------------|-----|---------------------------|
| `p_block_alloc_per_byte`     | 2   | Cost of allocating memory |
| `p_memcpy_per_byte`          | 0.4 | Cost of copying memory    |
| `p_hash_cost[Blake2b-256b1]` | 10  | Cost of hashing           |

Then, given `event_len`, `key_len`, and `value_len` as passed to the `emit_event` syscall, we charge gas as follows:

1. We compute the upper bound of the size of the serialized events (`size`) as `12 + 9 * event_len + key_len + value_len`.
2. We charge for the event: `p_gas_event + event_len * p_gas_event_per_entry`.
3. We charge for utf8 validation: `p_gas_utf8_validation + key_len * p_gas_utf8_validation_per_byte`.
4. We charge for copying/allocation 3 times: `3 * (p_block_alloc_per_byte + p_block_memcpy_per_byte) * size`.
5. We charge for hashing the final events to form the event AMT:  `p_hash_cost[Blake2b-256b1] * size`.

## Design Rationale

### Serialize a single buffer instead of using three

We considered serializing the `ActorEvent` using a single buffer (as with CBOR) for simplicity but decided against that since it required _some_ parsing if we wanted to charge gas for keys/values separately.

### Memory Gas

We charge for 3 memory copies/allocations because we expect:

1. An immediate copy from the actor's memory to the host's memory.
2. A copy when forming the event AMT.
3. A copy when returning events to the client.

## Backwards Compatibility

This FIP is consensus breaking, but should have no other impact on backwards compatibility.

Although this proposal restricts the number of entries accepted (from 256 to 255) and the key size (from 32 to 31) it will not have any compatibility issues with current EVM runtime as it produces events with maximum 5 entries and 5 keys.

## Test Cases

Provided with implementation.

## Security Considerations

TODO

## Implementation

https://github.com/filecoin-project/ref-fvm/pull/1807

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
