---
fip: "0065"
title: Ignore built-in market locked balance in circulating supply calculation
author: "Alex North <@anorth>"
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/719
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2023-06-16
---

## Simple Summary
Ignore the built-in market actor's locked balances in the network circulating supply calculation,
in preparation for direct commitment of data into sectors without a corresponding built-in market deal.

## Abstract
The built-in storage market actor's minimum deal collateral functions as a mandatory data assurance mechanism.
The market's collateral and deal payment balances are subtracted from total token supply when calculating the network circulating supply.
This proposal is to _ignore_ the built-in market's locked balance in the network circulating supply definition.
This is logical support for subsequent protocol changes that would allow storage providers to 
commit data into sectors without a built-in market deal or the associated collateral.
With such change, the built-in market would not be a privileged actor and does not warrant special treatment
in the circulating supply calculations.

## Change Motivation
A deal with the built-in storage market actor is currently the only permitted way for a storage provider to commit data into a sector.
The built-in market's minimum provider deal collateral functions as a network mandatory data assurance mechanism.
However, collateral amounts are tiny compared to the sector's initial pledge or termination penalty,
so have minimal impact on network security or data assurance.

| 32GiB at April 2023  | Verified | Unverified |
|----------------------|----------|------------|
| Deal collateral      | 0.0089   | 0.0089     |
| Initial pledge       | 2.171    | 0.2172     |
| DC as days of reward | 2.4      | 24         |
| DC / initial pledge  | **0.4%** | 4%         |
| Termination fee      | 0.3331   | 0.0333     |
| DC / termination fee | **2.7%** | 27%        |

FIL+ verified deals account for all but a tiny fraction of data onboarding today.
The minimum deal collateral is a more significant fraction of pledge and termination penalty for unverified deals,
because the built-in market's deal collateral calculation does not account for QA power.
This creates further disincentives for unverified deals, beyond the lower share of block rewards.

The built-in market actor is expensive in gas, and offers only basic functionality.
It cannot support the expansion in usage or functionality that network participants hope for,
and may eventually be replaced by superior user-programmed actors.
Work is in progress to permit SPs to commit data directly into sectors without a built-in market deal,
upon which more efficient and flexible storage functionality could be implemented in smart contracts.
This proposal is preparation for such changes, after which the built-in market actor would no longer occupy
a privileged position as a required intermediary.

The primary motivation for this proposal is simplicity:
deal collateral is only a very small part of the penalty charged by the network when a sector is terminated early,
and an even smaller part of the network's locked tokens.
It has trivial impact on network security or data assurance.
It is not justified to treat as a special case in the circulating supply calculation,
especially as the built-in market may represent only a small fraction of data commitments in the future.
Other storage application contracts may represent much more, yet their balances would be ignored in the calculation.
The built-in market's balances represent a small and likely decreasing fraction of locked tokens,
and the protocol will be simpler if they are ignored.

## Specification
The network circulating supply is currently specified as

```
CirculatingSupply = Vested + Mined - Burnt - Locked
  where
Locked = PledgeCollateral + ProviderDealCollateral + ClientDealCollateral + PendingDealPayment 
```

The calculation of `Locked` is changed to account only for pledge collateral (initial pledge plus vesting rewards):
```
Locked = PledgeCollateral
```

## Design Rationale
### Remove built-in market balances from the network circulating supply calculation
The built-in market's locked balances are a trivial level of the network's total locked amount.
Given its cost and limitations, it is unlikely that the built-in market actor could account for
a large share of the network's data commitments in the future,
reducing the relevance of its balances even further.
We can simplify the network's specification and implementation by removing them.

As of epoch 2911690, the built-in market's locked balances are:

| Built-in market account       | Balance     |
|-------------------------------|-------------|
| TotalClientLockedCollateral   | 0 FIL       |
| TotalProviderLockedCollateral | 317,498 FIL |
| TotalClientStorageFee         | 38 FIL      |
| Total                         | 317,536 FIL |

This amounts to a tiny fraction of network stocks:

| Network stock      | Amount          | Market fraction |
|--------------------|-----------------|-----------------|
| Total locked       | 150,981,531 FIL | 0.21%           |
| Circulating supply | 473,321,502 FIL | 0.067%          |

Ignoring the market's balances in these calculation will thus have negligible effect on downstream values
such as the sector initial pledge requirement.

Ignoring these balances in the calculation of network circulating supply will not actually unlock any tokens,
it will only add them to the collection of tokens that are locked in ways that the network core does not account for.

### Preparation for direct data commitments without built-in market deals
The built-in market actor constrains the data that storage providers (SPs) can store in sectors, limiting their utility and value,
and adding large costs in gas and complexity to the network core.
This proposal prepares for user-programmed smart contracts to act as markets or other data applications,
unconstrained by the built-in market's functionality or cost.

One option to retain mandatory data assurance independently of the built-in market actor would be 
to implement an equivalent data termination penalty in the built-in miner actor, where it would apply to all data.
This is rejected here because the collateral for a verified deal only amounts to about 3% of the termination penalty
that is charged when a FIL+ verified sector is prematurely terminated.
The amount is too small to make a significant difference to SP incentives.

However, even if such network data assurance were implemented in the miner actor, this proposal would still be relevant,
because any new locked balances would be held by the miner actor, not the built-in market.

## Backwards Compatibility
This proposal changes the calculation of the network's circulating supply, which forms part of the consensus rules.
It thus requires a coordinated network upgrade.

No on-chain interfaces or state are altered.

## Test Cases
The only relevant test is that the circulating supply calculation ignores balances locked in the built-in market actor.

## Security Considerations
None.

## Incentive Considerations
This proposal will increase the calculated circulating supply by approximately 320,000 FIL (0.067%, or ~7/10,000).
This will in turn increase the sector initial pledge requirement by a slightly smaller fraction.
This is considered inconsequential.

This proposal does not change any incentives associated with accepting or completing a deal with the built-in storage market actor.

## Product Considerations
The product considerations of the unnecessary costs of onboarding data, and the inflexibility of requiring built-in market deals,
are the primary motivations for this proposal.

This proposal, or some alternative, is logical preparation for clients and providers arranging
Filecoin Plus storage directly with the verified registry actor (at a significant cost reduction),
and to support for smart contract data applications that can avoid the costs and limitations associated with
mandatory use of the built-in market actor.

The built-in market actor will continue to require minimum deal collateral, so in the near term all deals will as well.
Participants and developers will need to explicitly alter their arrangements should they wish to make 
arrangements that uses a lesser amount, when that becomes possible.

## Implementation
TBA.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
