---
fip: FIP-0043
title: Signature Domain Separation
author: Geoff Stuart (@geoff-vball), Aayush Rajesekaran (@arajasek)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/387
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2022-08-02 
specs-sections: 4.5.1 Signatures
---

## Simple Summary
Add a tag data before signing to indicate what type of data the serialized bytes correspond to. 
This prevents data from being de-serialized into the wrong data type.

## Abstract
All signed data on the Filecoin network is first serialized to a byte-array using `cbor` encoding. 
A signed byte-array could potentially be deserialized into a different data type, which could be used maliciously.

Imagine User **A** signs a payment channel voucher and sends it to a storage provider,
but the malicious storage provider submits the signed data to the Consensus Fault method,
which decodes the data as an invalid block header and slashes User **A**. This FIP plans to prevent
these possible collisions between data types.

This proposal adds a fixed-length prefix to the data before signing which corresponds to the data type, 
allowing us to reject deserializations into the wrong format.

## Change Motivation
Currently, all signed data types on the Filecoin Network currently have implicit domain separation by coincidence. 
The metadata at the start of each `cbor` encoding used on the network currently all differ, making it impossible to 
deserialize any of them into the wrong type, which is why this FIP has not yet been implemented. 
The motivation for the timing of this FIP is to allow users to safely sign arbitrary data with 
the upcoming release of programmable contracts on the FVM.

## Specification
We can add the tag when signing and verifying signatures, but do not need to transmit the tag,
as we can infer it based on the type of data we're signing or verifying.
Most calls to `walletSign()` include `MsgMeta` from `api_wallet.go` which contains 
`MsgType` which is already implemented for `dealproposal`, `block`, and `message`.
We can extend the use of `MsgMeta` to include all other data types, and 
use this metadata to know which tag to include when signing.

We propose using a single tag for all user-generated data that might be used in a smart contract.
This prevents us from having to deal with an entire "user-space" for tags. 
Smart contracts will be free to implement their own tagging system below the 
top level tag if desired.

We already have a domain separation tag for `RemoveDataCapProposal` structs. 
Below is simplified code of the current implementation:

### Signing
```go
const SignatureDomainSeparation_RemoveDataCap = "fil_removedatacap:"

params := verifregtypes.RemoveDataCapProposal{...}

paramBuf := new(bytes.Buffer)
paramBuf.WriteString(SignatureDomainSeparation_RemoveDataCap)
err = params.MarshalCBOR(paramBuf)

signature, err := api.WalletSign(ctx, verifier, paramBuf.Bytes())
```

### Verifying
```go
func removeDataCapRequestIsValidOrAbort(...) {
    proposal := RemoveDataCapProposal{...}
    
    buf := bytes.Buffer{}
    buf.WriteString(SignatureDomainSeparation_RemoveDataCap)
    err := proposal.MarshalCBOR(&buf)
    
    err := rt.VerifySignature(VerifierSignature, VerifierAddress, buf.Bytes()); err != nil {
        rt.Abortf(...)
    }
}
```

### Data Types
A (hopefully) exhaustive list of the different types of data we sign.

- Messages
- Block Headers
- Deal Proposals
- Storage Ask
- Payment Channel Vouchers
- VRFs (Already uses int64 as DST)
- Remove Verified Data Cap (Already uses DST)
- BLS Aggregation (Do we run into problems here?)


## Design Rationale
This FIP details what we believe to be these simplest and most robust way to prevent
unintentional and malicious collisions between message types. A fixed-length tag was chosen
because variable-length tags may not offer total collision resistance.

## Backwards Compatibility
We propose doing this upgrade in a 2-step process. In the first step, we will sign all
new messages with the DS Tag, but will verify messages with or without the tag. This
will allow for any messages signed before the upgrade to still be valid after, and will
also give 3rd party wallets a chance to update to use the new tags.

In a later network upgrade, we will enforce the use of tags in the verification process,
invalidating any messages signed without tags. There is one potential exception:
payment channel vouchers. These are designed to be signed messages that live off chain
and have no expiry. We must be very careful if we want to invalidate any payment channel vouchers.

## Test Cases
For each data type, we should have test cases for valid data with and without tags.
We should also include test cases where the incorrect tag is supplied for each data type.

## Security Considerations
This FIP should be preventing a security concern that might be introduced by the FVM.
This FIP should not create any new security concerns.

## Other Considerations/ Open Questions
This FIP will have to be implemented by 3rd party wallets between steps 1 and 2.
The timing of step 2 can be adjusted if we need more time to strengthen compliance.

BLS aggregation may cause issues. `VerifyBlsAggregate()` may not being able to accept
both tagged and untagged messages in the same aggregation.

## Implementation
To be provided before "Final" status.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
