---
fip: 0017
title: Lightweight Sector updates
author: @nicola, @lucaniz, @rosariogennaro, @irenegia, @Kubuxu
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/issues/131
status: Draft
type: Core
created: 2021-07-27
spec-sections: 
  - miner actors
  - lotus mining

---

## Simple Summary

A protocol for updating any sector with new data without re-sealing.

## Abstract

The intuition is that the miner "xor"-s (techically field addition) the new data with some unpredictable randomness into the last layer of the Proof of Replication.

The miner generates one message which proves that sector was updated with new data.

## Change Motivation

Since 90+% of sectors in the Filecoin Network are CC sectors, having a protocol that allows for updating CC sectors to store real data without incurring in a full re-sealing would massively improve our network in terms of the amount of real data stored through it. 

1. It would allow **decoupling sealing latency from deal-making speed** - offering storage clients an improved experience for how quickly their data can land in on-chain deals
2. It would **unlock the 8EiB of storage already committed to the Filecoin network** to be quickly used for deals - enabling a 100PiB+ client to make deals for their entire dataset with a single miner like [f0127595](https://filfox.info/en/address/f0127595) which already has 120PiB of committed capacity.
3. It makes **utilizing existing committed capacity much cheaper for miners** (since they’ve already invested the sealing cost), increasing the chances they pay clients to add FIL+ data to these sectors.

What this FIP does not support (see Future Work section)

* Deal updates
* Moving deals across sectors

## Specification

### One-messages Update Protocol
1. **Miner accepts and publishes storage deals (using PublishStorageDeals)**
2. **Miner updates an existing replica with deals**:
	1. Generate `dataRand = H(Comm(D_1, D_2, ..., D_N))` where `Comm(D_1, D_2, ..., D_N)` computes CommD of the sector from CommDs of deals.
	2. Encode the deal data into existing replica using `newReplica[i] = Enc(replica[i], data[i], dataRand)` function:
      	- `newReplica` is the vector of `Fr` elements of the new replica
      	- `sectorKey` is the vector of `Fr` elements of the CC sector replica data
      	- `data` is the vector of `Fr` elements of the deals data ordered and padded as done in the sealing subroutine
	3. Compute CommR_new (`UpdatingSectorCID`) of the `newReplica` and set `seed = H(CommR_new)`.
3. **Miner produces a proof of sector update.**:
   1. Let `seed = H(CommR_new)`
   2. Let `dataRand = H(CommD_new)`
   3. Generate a SNARK that proves
      1. For challenge `i=0..SectorUpdateProveChallenges`,  `c = ChallengeGen(seed, i)`
         1. Encoding: the following we correcty computed: `newReplica[c] = Enc(sectorKey[c], data[c], dataRand)`
         2. Inclusion proofs:
            1. `newReplica[c]` is the opening of `UpdatingSectorCID` at position `c`
            2. `sectorKey[c]` is the opening of `CommRLast` from `SealedSectorCID` at position `c`
            3. `data[c]` is the opening of `UnsealedSectorCID` at position `c`
4. **Miner publishes `Miner.ProveReplicaUpdates`**:
	1. Validate input parameters
	2. Activate Deals	
	3. Verify the proof of correct data update:
		1. 	Compute `UnsealedSectorCID` (CommD) and `dataRand = H(CommD)` from on-chain info about `deals`.
		2. Compute `seed = H(UpdatingSectorCID)`.
		3. Generate challenges from `seed`.
		4. Verify that `proof` is valid for using inputs: `dataRand`, `seed`, `UnsealedSectorCID`, `CommR_new`, `CommR_original` and challanges.
	4. Update the sector info and power of the upgraded sector

### Retrieving updated data

1. From the `replica`:
   2. Regenerate `sectorKey` by re-sealing the sector
   3. For each `i`: `Dec(sectorKey[i], replica[i], dataRand)`

### Deprecation of current CC Upgrade

`PreCommitSector` will no longer be allowed to schedule current cc upgrades during prove commit.  The data on chain tracking cc upgrades and the miner actor logic doing current cc upgrades will be removed.

### ProveReplicaUpdates Actor Method

#### Spec

`Miner.ProveReplicaUpdates(UpdatingCCSectors []SectorID, dlIdxs []int, partitionIdxs []int, Deals [][]DealID, Proofs []ReplicaUpdateProofs)`

Param validation

1. Assert that `SectorID` was originally CC sector
2. Assert that `SectorID` has no deals active
3. Validate proof size is not above limits
4. Validate batch size bounds are not above limits

Market Activation

1. Call market.ActivateDeals on all sets of deals. 
2. Call market.ComputeDataCommittment to get commDs

Proof verification

1. Extend runtime with VerifyReplicaUpdate method 

Updte Sector Info

1. `SectorNumber` i.e. the sector ID, `Expiration` and `SealProof` fields remain unchanged
2. `SealedCID`, `DealIDs`, `DealWeight`, `VerifiedDealWeight` are all modified to match the upgraded sector with deals
3. `InitialPledge` is the max of CC sector's InitialPledge and the value computed with the upgrade power at the upgrade epoch
4. `ReplacedDayReward` is assigned the value of `ExpectedDayReward` and `ExpectedDayReward` is recalculated
5. `ReplacedSectorAge` is `upgradeEpoch - Activation`, and `Activation` is reset to `upgradeEpoch`
6. `ExpectedStoragePledge` is recalculated

Update Power

In the common case that the CC sector's power is proven in the system the power actor is updated with a power delta = `Power(UpgradedSector) - Power(CCSector)`

If the CC sector is in the Unprove state the partition's Unproven power is recalculated: `Partition.UnprovePower - Power(CCSector) + Power(UpgradedSector)` and the power actor is not notified.  It will be notified when the CC Sector is first proven.


#### Batching and Error Handling
This method will accept many updates.  Error handling will work by ignoring updates that do not pass validation and only failing if all updates fail validation or if the entire operation fails.  TODO how does this work for ComputeDataCommittment and ActivateDeals?

### Upgrade and State Migration
1. Migration removing precommit info about cc upgrades in the PreCommit map
2. Precommit params will lose the four cc upgrade fields

### Algorithms

### Encoding

The current encoding algorithm is the following:

`Enc(sectorKey[i], data[i], rand) = sectorKey[i] + data[i] * rand`

The Encoding function is cheap and allows for parallel encoding. 

### Decoding

`Dec(sectorKey[i], replica[i], dataRand) = (replica[i] - sectorKey[i]) * (dataRand<sup>-1</sup>)`

The modular inverse of `dataRand` is computed only once per whole operation.

## Design Rationale

### Parameters choice

* `SectorUpdateProveChallenges`: 2450 (TODO confirm number of challenges)

TODO

## Backwards Compatibility

All sectors can be upgraded.

### Breaking immutability of sectors and deals



## Test Cases

TODO

## Security Considerations

### Loosing epsilon-Replication guarantees

This changes changes the security property of Filecoin. Retrievability of the files and space-hardness are still guaranteed. TODO: expand on this.

## Incentive Considerations

TODO

## Product Considerations

TODO

## Implementation


## Future work

* DeclareDeals to support deal transfer: allow moving deals from sector to sector
* CapacityDeals: allow purchasing a capacity of the storage of a miner instead of the storage of a specific deal
* Update protocol that does not require to perform an operation on a full sector.
* DealUpdates: a license to terminate a deal in place for a new one (e.g. a user wants to update a portion of their files)

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
