---
fip: "0115"
title: Premium Percentile Base Fee Target
author: William Morriss (@wjmelements), Lin Zexiao (@LinZexiao)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1236
status: Draft
type: Technical Core
category: Core
created: 2026-02-13
spec-sections: 2.8.19 Gas Fees
---

# FIP-0115: Premium Percentile Base Fee Target

## Simple Summary

Replacing the utilization-based base fee adjustment with a premium-based target will stabilize gas markets and improve tipset efficiency.

## Abstract

Instead of targeting 50% gas limit utilization, which is unreliable for multiple block proposers, congestion is detected by considering the ratio between the effective priority fee, called the premium, and the base fee.
When this ratio exceeds 1/8, the base fee increases; when it falls below this threshold (or if the blocks are sufficiently empty), the base fee decreases.
This approach aligns base fee adjustments with congestion signals, which should improve the predictability of gas markets, thereby reducing proposer duplications.

## Change Motivation

EIP-1559 makes predictable gas markets by providing short-term supply elasticity.
The utilization target of EIP-1559 was designed for a system measuring gasUsed in a single-proposer system.
In contrast, Filecoin has multiple proposers, and so its utilization depends on the tipset efficiency, determined by the decidedly unreliable independence of proposed blocks.

The utilization target is a bad fit for the current multiple-proposer system, because duplicated transactions consume `BlockGasLimit` but reduce utilization.
This is demonstrated by the base fee not spiking during periods of congestion.
In fact, no utilization-targeting scheme can distinguish between high-duplication situations caused by stratified priority fees and those caused by inactivity.
Consequently, base fee adjustment is not aligned with congestion.
When the base fee does not increase under congestion, it results in unpredictable gas markets, which further stratify priority fees, further increasing duplication.

This proposed change develops a new target for determining whether to increase base fee that is more suitable to multiple proposers.
This will increase the ratio of the base fee to the priority fee, which will reduce duplication and thereby improve utilization.

## Specification

Premium refers to the effective miner tip per gas after subtracting base fee.

$$ Premium_{i} = Max(0, Min(MaxPriorityFeePerGas_{i}, MaxFeePerGas_{i} - BaseFee_{curr})) $$

To assemble a premium distribution weighted by gas limit, dedupe the transactions in the tipset by sender and nonce (rather than by CID) in tipset block order and sort by premium.
Truncate the lowest-premium tail if the total gas limit exceeds `BlockGasLimit`, or pad with zeros if it falls short.

Percentile premium targets have three parameters.

1. `P` = $20$, a percentile of the effective premium distribution to consider
2. `R` = $\frac{1}{8}$, the ratio between the effective premium at `P` and the applicable base fee.
3. `MinBaseFee` = $100$

The behavior of `ComputeNextBaseFee` will change to consider the premium $Premium_{P}$ at percentile `P` of this distribution and then calculate the next base fee using the following formulae.

$$ MaxAdj = \lceil BaseFee_{curr} * R \rceil $$
$$ BaseFee_{next} = Max(MinBaseFee, BaseFee_{curr} + Min(MaxAdj, Premium_{P} - MaxAdj)) $$

## Design Rationale

Prices provide information signals to market participants to inform their decisions.

High premiums signal congestion, because pending transactions are competing for blockspace.
Under congestion, the base fee should increase to price-out less-urgent transactions, to signal current demand to subsequent transactors, and to reduce net inflation.

Low priority fees signal available blockspace.
If blockspace is available, the base fee should decrease in order to signal current supply to subsequent transactors, welcome less-urgent transactions, and make use of network capacity.

### Bounding

The minimum possible value of $Premium_{P}$ is 0, so $BaseFee_{next}$ is bounded.

$$ BaseFee_{next} \in [BaseFee_{curr} - MaxAdj, BaseFee_{curr} + MaxAdj] $$

These boundaries match the behavior of EIP-1559.

`MinBaseFee` preserves the current base fee minimum.

### Base Fee Manipulation

`P` is low in order to make $Premium_{P}$ less manipulable.

An individual proposer can increase the base fee by proposing non-public (and therefore unduplicated) transactions that pay themselves a high priority fee.
The possible base fee increase per epoch is capped by $MaxAdj$.
The cost of this manipulation is the lost priority fees plus the base fees of their non-public transactions.

In the short term, such manipulation could reduce effective priority fees, increase base fee burn, and delay confirmations.
Such griefing might increase priority fees in the medium term, but because `R` and `P` are low, this manipulation is unprofitable.
However, this change does make upward base fee manipulation more practical than before.

`R` is low to reduce the average ratio of priority fees to base fees and improve tipset efficiency.
A low `R` reduces the profitability of upward base fee manipulation.

On the other hand, downward base fee manipulation is more difficult after this change, as proposing an empty block has a negligible impact on the base fee due to truncation.

### Premium Subversion

Users can subvert priority fees by paying priority fees out-of-band.
Such users might pay zero priority fees and still have their transactions included due to an off-chain subscription service or a direct payment within the transaction.

Filecoin currently mitigates this with Ticket Quality uncertainty, which reduces the benefits of such coordination.

Since such transactions are not in the public mempool, they are unlikely to threaten tipset efficiency.
If priority fee subversion becomes common enough to threaten the burn, it could be mitigated in several ways.

1. Require that transactions be proposed by multiple proposers.
2. Ignore `tx.maxPriorityFeePerGas` and only consider `MaxFeePerGas` in the premium calculation.
3. Modify tipset transaction ordering rules to execute transactions in priority order.

## Backwards Compatibility

### Activation

The new `ComputeNextBaseFee` is first applied when processing the tipset at the activation epoch, such that the base fee at `activationEpoch + 1` is the first computed by the new formula.

### Gas Price Recommendations

Systems recommending gas prices to transactors SHOULD be updated.

#### Filecoin.GasEstimateGasPremium and `eth_maxPriorityFeePerGas`

These methods are used to suggest GasPremium to users before they sign transactions.
`eth_maxPriorityFeePerGas` SHOULD delegate to GasEstimateGasPremium with `nblocksincl = 1` and `gaslimit = 20000`.

##### Simple GasEstimateGasPremium

This method MAY be updated to suggest a gas premium of $BaseFee_{curr} * R \pm \varepsilon$, where $\varepsilon$ is a small random deviation to assist message selection.

##### Advanced GasEstimateGasPremium

A more sophisticated approach MAY consider $GasLimit_i$ and `nblocksincl` using the mempool state and remaining epoch time:

1. Let $k = GasLimit_i / BlockGasLimit$.
2. Initialize `result` to a safe maximum premium.
3. Build a sorted gas premium distribution from the current mempool.
4. Scale the above-base-fee portion of the distribution by the fraction of the epoch remaining, to model incoming transactions.
5. Let $Premium_k =$ the $k$-th percentile premium of the top $BlockGasLimit$ gas.
5. Set `result` to $\min($`result`$, Premium_k)$.
6. If `nblocksincl` $< 2$, return `result`.
7. Otherwise, decrement `nblocksincl`, simulate block selection by removing a random subset of top transactions and recalculating $BaseFee$, then repeat from step 4 with a full epoch remaining.

This targets the minimum premium needed to outbid enough mempool transactions to fit within a proposer block.
Transactions not selected by the top proposer may still be included by others.
Of course, inclusion within any number of epochs cannot be guaranteed.

#### Filecoin.GasEstimateFeeCap

This method considers `maxqueueblks` and `msg` and suggests a MaxFeePerGas for the `msg`.
This method SHOULD return the sum of the premium and the worst case base fee after `maxqueueblks` epochs.
$$ FeeCap(maxqueueblks, msg) = Premium_{msg} + BaseFee_{curr} * (1 + R)^{Max(1, maxqueueblks)} $$

#### `eth_gasPrice`

This method SHOULD return the sum of the base fee from tipset block headers and the premium from `GasEstimateGasPremium` with `nblocksincl = 1` and `gaslimit = 20000`.

#### Filecoin.GasEstimateMessageGas

This method, which fills all gas fields on a message, SHOULD also be updated to reflect the new premium guidance.

### Transition Period

These gas price recommendations may not be immediately adopted by all market participants.
Additionally, it will take 30-60 minutes after the activation of this change for the base fee to climb to a new normal.
This section discusses some current practices and their expected impact.

#### MinGasPremium

All clients currently recommend a `MinGasPremium` of 100,000 attoFIL.
This minimum SHOULD be removed.
Affected transactions might overpay and confirm sooner than necessary.
If enough transactions continue meeting this minimum, the base fee would rise to at least 800 femtoFIL.

#### Sampling History

All clients currently suggest gas prices by sampling recent fee history.
This strategy underestimates future gas prices when those prices are steadily climbing.
Affected transactions might be delayed, and could even become underpriced.
Transactors can replace stuck transactions by submitting a new transaction with a higher gas price and the same nonce.

## Test Cases

### $Premium$

| $BaseFee_{curr}$ | MaxFeePerGas | MaxPriorityFeePerGas | Premium |
| ---------------: | -----------: | -------------------: | ------: |
|                8 |            8 |                    8 |       0 |
|                8 |           16 |                    7 |       7 |
|                8 |           19 |                   10 |      10 |
|           123456 |       123455 |               123455 |       0 |
|           123456 |      1234567 |              1111112 | 1111111 |

### Tipset Gas Percentiles

For `BlockGasLimit = 10_000_000_000`, suppose there were only two transactions in the merged tipset.

| $Premium_{0}$ | $GasLimit_{0}$ | $Premium_{1}$ | $GasLimit_{1}$ | $Premium_{P}$ |
| ------------: | -------------: | ------------: | -------------: | ------------: |
|           123 |     5999999999 |           100 |     2000000000 |             0 |
|           123 |     5999999999 |             0 |     2000000001 |             0 |
|           123 |     5999999999 |           100 |     2000000001 |           100 |
|           123 |     7999999999 |           100 |     2000000001 |           100 |
|           123 |     8000000000 |           100 |     2000000000 |           123 |
|           123 |     8000000000 |           100 |     9000000000 |           123 |

### $BaseFee_{next}$

| $BaseFee_{curr}$ | $MaxAdj$ | $Premium_{P}$ | $BaseFee_{next}$ |
| ---------------: | -------: | ------------: | ---------------: |
|              100 |      13  |             0 |              100 |
|              100 |      13  |            13 |              100 |
|              100 |      13  |            14 |              101 |
|              100 |      13  |            26 |              113 |
|              801 |     101  |             0 |              700 |
|              801 |     101  |            20 |              720 |
|              801 |     101  |            40 |              740 |
|              801 |     101  |            60 |              760 |
|              801 |     101  |            80 |              780 |
|              801 |     101  |           100 |              800 |
|              801 |     101  |           120 |              820 |
|              801 |     101  |           140 |              840 |
|              801 |     101  |           160 |              860 |
|              801 |     101  |           180 |              880 |
|              801 |     101  |           200 |              900 |
|              801 |     101  |           201 |              901 |
|              808 |     101  |             0 |              707 |
|              808 |     101  |             1 |              708 |
|              808 |     101  |           201 |              908 |
|              808 |     101  |           202 |              909 |
|              808 |     101  |           203 |              909 |

## Security Considerations

Concerns about gas premium subversion can be mitigated before they impact the base fee by early detection.
Alternatively, this change could be released alongside a separate change mitigating such subversion.

## Incentive Considerations

While a low `R` will reduce proposer income from premiums by increasing the proportion of transaction fees that are burned, higher base fees should reduce net inflation.
The expected reduction in premiums may be mitigated if tipset efficiency improves, due to higher utilization.

## Product Considerations

This change does not alter any external-facing interfaces, so existing tools should remain compatible.

After this change, the base fee will adjust as originally intended.
Base fee elasticity will improve gas utilization, increasing network throughput.

Because the base fee will rise more often than before, an insufficient gas fee cap may delay message inclusion.

## Implementation

- [ ] Curio (TODO)
- [ ] Forest (TODO)
- [ ] Lotus (TODO)
- [ ] Lotus Miner (TODO)
- [ ] Venus (TODO)

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
